Interpretivism Refuted

Jeremy Yuanming Shi

December 19, 2016

There is ample evidence to arguably support the intuitively plausible statement that

"many animals think". For example, primates, to some degree, can “read” the minds of other

individuals of the same species.1 New Caledonian crows build and use tools to retrieve food.2

Ravens are capable of attributing the presence of an unseen competitor based on auditory

information.3 And evolution shows a psychological unity between non-human animals and

humans.4 However, the claim "many animals think" faces some challenges. One challenge is

from the indeterminacy on what animals think. If the content of animals’ thoughts cannot

be precisely characterized, then, arguably, animals do not have beliefs. Similar arguments

from indeterminacy could also be extended to the discussions on other mental attitudes (like

desires) of animals. If the contents of these mental states cannot be precisely described, then

arguably animals do not have these attitudes.

Dale Jamieson presents this puzzle as the seeming inconsistency between these following

two propositions:

(1) Many animals think.

(2) Exactly what animals think on particular occasions cannot reliably be char-

acterized.(Jamieson, 2009, p. 16)

1Krupenye et al. (2016)
2Taylor et al. (2012)
3(Bugnyar et al., 2016)
4For instance, see Crisp (1996).

1

But the proposition (1) is hardly precise. Whether (1) is consistent with (2) depends on

how we understand "think" or animals’ "thoughts". Jamieson use “think” and “thoughts”

in “neutral, common sense” ways.5 Jacob Beck suggests that if "think" or "thoughts" are

understood as determinate mental states with mental contents, claim (1) could be revised

to (1’), which is a statement of Realism6 of animal thoughts

(1’) Realism: Animals have causally eﬃcacious cognitive representations with

determinate contents. (Beck, 2013, p. 521)

Since we have a new requirement for "thoughts" (i.e. "what animals think" is the contents

of mental states.), (2) could be correspondingly revised to (2’) as follows (and Beck dubs it

the “Indeterminacy” thesis of animal thoughts):

(2’) Indeterminacy: we are currently unable to provide precise linguistic char-

acterizations of the contents of animals’ cognitive representations.

(Beck,

2013, p. 521)

Beck also calls for an explanation on the consistency between (1’) and (2’):

if we want to

be a Realist on animal thoughts, then we have to ﬁnd an explanation to make (1’) and (2’)

compatible. In other words, how could a Realist explain away Indeterminacy? In Beck (2013),

he gives four diﬀerent explanations and argues that the best explanation is an explanation

from nonlinguistic format. That is, animals have non-linguistic formats, which block us from

describing what exactly animals think.

In this article, I compare Jamieson’s interpretivist approach and Beck’s Realist approach

on animal thoughts. I argue that although Beck’s Realism has some problems, there are

more problems for interpretivism and these problems are much worse, so we need to refute

Interpretivism. In the ﬁrst part, I describe what the tension between Realism and Indeter-

minacy is. In the second part, I look at Jamieson’s interpretivist approach, which suggests

5See (Jamieson, 2009, p. 15).
6For convenience, throughout my paper, unless speciﬁcally mentioned, I use “Realism” to refer to Realism

on animal thoughts, and a Realist on animal thought is one who accepts (1’).

2

that (1) is true and (2) is false. In the third part, I look at how Beck explains the compati-

bility of (1’) and (2’), and show a problem of Beck’s Realism. Then I show the problem of

Interpretivism in part 4.

1 A Detailed Description on the Tension Between Real-

ism and Indeterminacy

To give a detailed understanding on why there is a tension between (1) and (2) (and similarly,

(1’) and (2’)), I start with a famous example from Stich (1979),

"[C]onsider trusty Fido who sees his master bury a meaty bone in the back yard.
Fido goes out the door and begins pawing at the very spot where the bone is
buried. On the belief-desire account, Fido believes that there is a meaty bone
buried in the yard and wants to get it.”(Stich, 1979, p. 18)

In this passage, the "belief-desire account" refers the Realist view that animals do have

beliefs and desires and we can determine exactly the content of animals’ beliefs and desires.

The intuitive support for this account is that we usually attribute the belief "there is a meaty

bone buried in the yard" to Fido. However, if Fido really has this belief, Fido has to have

the concepts of "meaty", bone", "yard", etc. But Stich points out that Fido does not seem

to have these concepts:

"..Fido does not, it seems safe to assume, have any beliefs about the origin and
general anatomical function of bones. Nor would he recognise or exhibit any
interest in chewing atypical bones – the bones of the middle ear, for example, or
the collar bone of a blue whale." (Stich, 1979, p. 18)

If Fido had the concept of "bone", then Fido would have been able to apply the concept of

"bone" into many other situations.7 But it does not seem to be the case. As Stich points

out, Fido cannot recognize or exhibit interests for a atypical bone and does not understand

7This is also called the requirement of “systematicity” for conceptual thought. See Fodor and Pylyshyn

(1988).

3

the origin and functions of bone. Moreover, Fido’s behavior does not suggest that Fido has

the capability of distinguishing between a bone and a bone-like object, which is essential for

the concept "bone" to be represented in Fido’s beliefs (if there are any).

If Fido does not have concepts like "meaty", "bone", "yard", then we cannot determine

what exactly Fido believes. So it seems the fact that we cannot decide what Fido exactly

thinks (which is what (2) and (2’) claim) might lead us to judge that animals do not have

beliefs. If animals do not have beliefs, then (1) and (1’) are arguably false. The seeming

tension leads Jamieson and Beck to present interpretivism and Realism, correspondingly.

There are mainly two reasons for why investigating the relation between (1) and (2) (and

their counterparts (1’) and (2’)) is important.

First, the investigation has practical signiﬁcance. Jamieson says “in order to know what

our duties to animals are, it is not enough to know that they think, we must also know

something about what they think.”(Jamieson, 2009, p. 16) Knowing what animals think will

help us better understand their psychological lives and interests. This reason is also shared

by Beck in Beck (2012a). Beck points out that the worry from Indeterminacy is an issue in

cognitive ethology, where the researchers usually attribute animals’ beliefs (if there are any)

with explicit content. For example, the researchers may say “a chimpanzee is stripping the

leaves oﬀ a branch because it believes that bare branches facilitate termite ﬁshing”(Beck,

2012a, p. 220. My emphasis) But here Stich’s worry still stands: does the chimpanzee really

have the concepts of “branch” and “termite”? If the chimpanzee only has the concept of

“termite-shaped” or “termite-like-ﬂavored”, the chimpanzee would still act in the same way:

it can still strip the leaves oﬀ and eat it, which means the chimpanzee may have the exact

belief the researcher ascribes. So getting clear on what animals think is an important task

in cognitive ethology, which assumes animals have the capability of thinking.8

The second reason for investigating the relation between Realism and Indeterminacy

is that in daily conversations, we usually assume Indeterminacy leads to the rejection of

8For basic doctrines and assumptions of cognitive ethology, see Jamieson and Bekoﬀ (1992).

4

Realism. Philosophical work could debunk or vindicate this common sense. Jamieson points

out that “it is unsatisfying to be told that we have good reasons for supposing that animals

think even though we know very little about what they think.”(Jamieson, 2009, p. 16)

Jamieson invites us to think of a clever dog—Grete. I believe Grete has cognitive powers

(i.e. she is able to think), but I have no idea on what she is thinking. This might naturally

lead to the doubt from another person saying “then why do you believe Grete has cognitive

powers?” Thus it seems that we need more explanations on the relation between Realism

and Indeterminacy.

In the next section, I take a closer look at what interpretivism is and how it solves the

tension between (1) and (2).

2

Interpretivism

Interpretivism9 is a view on the ontology of mental states in general, including both humans’

and non-human animals’. But here I focus on interpretivism on the thoughts of non-human

animals.10 According to interpretivism, what an animal thinks largely depends on what

an interpreter attributes to the animal.

In deciding between diﬀerent interpretations, we

should look at which interpretation best explains and predicts the animal’s behaviors. Thus,

interpretivism holds that statement (2) is false, which means that we actually can reliably

characterize what exactly what animals think on particular occasions.

Humans ascribe beliefs to animals. Could these belief ascriptions to animals be liter-

ally true? Interpretivists’ answer is yes. That is also where interpretivism diﬀers from

9Daniel Dennett calls it “interpretionism” in Dennett (1987). The name “interpretionism” is also used in
Andrews (2014). In my paper, following Jamieson’s terminology, I take interpretionism and interpretivism
to be the same and use “interpretivism”.

10Arguments made in Jamieson (2009) could be applied to human beings as well. Same with Dennett,
Jamieson is also an interpretivist on human thoughts. That is why in the section when I compare inter-
pretivism with eliminativism and instrumentalism, I also consider them to be general views on both what
human and non-human animals thoughts are. See Jamieson (1998) for more of his work on interpretivism,
where he talks more about the similarity and the continuity between the thoughts of humans and non-human
animals.

5

eliminativism and instrumentalism. Eliminativism is also called eliminative materialism.11

According to eliminativism, ascriptions of folk-psychological concepts like beliefs and desires

to humans and animals, will eventually be abandoned and replaced by neuroscience.12 In-

strumentalism has diﬀerent forms and some of them are very similar with eliminativism.13

On the issue of non-human animals’ thoughts, a key feature of instrumentalism is that it

takes ascriptions of beliefs and desires to animals to be false. And it emphasizes on the

usefulness of these ascriptions. This feature is well illustrated by one version of instrumen-

talism called ﬁctionalism, according to which these ascriptions are useful falsehoods. Similar

with ﬁctionalism, other kinds of instrumentalism may maintain “the theoretical claims in

question were neither true nor false but mere instruments of calculation.”(Dennett, 1987,

p. 171) Thus, belief, desires, and other folk-psychological ascriptions to animals are merely

useful instruments.

In contrast with eliminativism and instrumentalism, interpretivism maintains that our

belief ascriptions to animals could be literally true. So if we take Realism to be the claim

“many animals think and belief ascriptions to animals could be literally true”, then interpre-

tivists are Realists too. According to Dennett, interpretivism takes beliefs and desires to be

“abstracta rather than part of the ’furniture of the physical world”’ (Dennett, 1987, p. 171)

and these ascriptions are true “only if we exempt them from a certain familiar standard of

literality.”(ibid.) What decides the mental content of animals is not something written in the

organism’s brain, but the “interaction between an organism and an interpreter”. (Jamieson,

11In Jamieson (2009), it is not clear whether Jamieson uses “eliminativism” to refer to eliminative mate-
rialism or merely “eliminativism on animals thought” (the thesis that animals do not think). It seems that
he only focuses on the “eliminativism on animals thought”, but here, by “eliminativism” I refer to eliminative
materialism.

12Here is the classical deﬁnition of eliminativism by Paul Churchland: it is the thesis that “our common-
sense conception of psychological phenomena constitutes a radically false theory, a theory so fundamentally
defective that both the principles and the ontology of that theory will eventually be displaced, rather than
smoothly reduced, by completed neuroscience.” (Churchland, 1981, p. 67)

13For instance, here is what Dennett says about classical instrumentalism, “classical instrumentalism was
an all-embracing view, a complete rejection of realism; one was instrumentalistic not only about centers of
gravity and parallelograms of forces and the Equator, but also about electrons, cells, planets — everything
but what could be observed with the naked senses. ”Dennett (1987, p. 169)

6

2009, p. 30)14 Beck mistakenly identiﬁes Dennett and Jamieson as instrumentalists in Beck

(2012a). He says Jamieson and Dennett’s explanations of animals’ mental states should

be taken “no more seriously than explanations of a thermostat’s behavior in terms of its

‘desire’ to keep the room at 72 degrees Fahrenheit, and its ‘belief’ that the room has de-

viated from that temperature.” (Beck, 2012a, p. 220) However, as we have seen, Dennett

and Jamieson are actually interpretivists instead of instrumentalists. Moreover, although

Dennett may ascribe beliefs to both animals and thermostats, he thinks there are diﬀerent

levels of sophistication—a dog’s belief is more sophisticated than the belief of an amoeba or

a thermostat. 15 Even if there is no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between a thermostat’s belief and

a dog’s belief, it does not aﬀect the interpretivists’ arguments for (1).

Now a question for interpretivists is: we may have diﬀerent belief ascriptions in the same

context, how to decide which one is true? In other words, according to interpretivism, what

makes a belief ascription true? If mental contents of an animal were something written

in its brain, then whether an ascription is true will be decided by whether the ascription

perfectly matches or corresponds with the representation written in the animal’s brain. But

for interpretivists like Dennett and Jamieson, “the truthmakers will be connected to some

idea of success.”(Jamieson, 2009, p. 30) Whether a belief ascription succeeds or not depends

on whether it is reliable enough to predict the animals’ further behaviors and whether it

meets the standards of a variety of pragmatic concerns. For instance, we can examine the

example discussed earlier from Stich, where the interpreter attributes to Fido the belief “there

is a meaty bone in the backyard”. The belief ascription is true, because it is reliable enough

to predict Fido’s behaviors (say, Fido looks very satisﬁed after getting the bone and no longer

paws at the very spot of the bone), and it matches with Fido’s whole behavior patterns.16 In

many other more complicated cases, the true ascription also needs to be regimented by the

interpreter’s purposes, interests, background knowledge, appreciation of context, and other

14This is also a place where interpretivism diﬀers from Beck’s representationalism, as I will discuss later.
15See Dennett (1995).
16Sometimes interpretivists use the concept of “pattern” to better describe what an success is. See Dennett

(1991).

7

pragmatic concerns in each context. Based on the regimentation in each context, there will

be an ideal interpreter who gives the true belief ascriptions to animals.17

Since according to interpretivism the truth-maker of belief ascription is the success of

reliably predicting animals’ behaviors and many of our belief ascriptions are successful as

such, these belief ascriptions are true. In other words, the mental contents the ideal inter-

preter attributes to animals are literally true, which means that (2) is false—exactly what

an animal thinks can be reliably characterized. Thus, the worry of indeterminacy on the

contents of animal thoughts goes away. We can not only claim that many animals think, but

also characterize exactly what they think. Therefore, according to interpretivism, “accepting

(1) implies rejecting (2)”. (Jamieson, 2009, p.30)

In the next part, in contrast with interpretivism, I look at Beck’s Realism and see how

it deals with the relation between (1’) and (2’) (i.e.

the relation between Realism and

Indeterminacy).

3 Beck’s Realism

In this part, I take a closer look at Beck’s Realism. In 3.1, I show how Realism explains the

incompatibility between (1’) and (2’). In 3.2, I show a in Beck’s arguments for Realism.

3.1 Beck’s Realist Explanation on the Incompatibility between (1’)

and (2’)

In Beck’s paper, he examines four diﬀerent explanations on why (1’) is true and (2’) is also

true. That is, why it is the case that animals have cognitive representations with determinate

contents and why we cannot precisely characterize what animals think. Beck suggests an

explanation from nonlinguistic formats, which is the view that we are unable to characterize

what animals think because their cognitive representations might be in a totally diﬀerent

17And also humans, because interpretivism is a view about belief ascriptions to humans as well.

8

format and cannot be precisely translated into human’s natural language. Beck unpacks

this view into two claims: ﬁrst, “representations of diﬀerent formats cannot be precisely

translated into one another”; second, “the format of animal cognition diﬀers from the format

of natural language.” Beck (2013, p. 536) Here is how Beck argues for each of them.

In order to argue for the ﬁrst claim “representations of diﬀerent formats cannot be pre-

cisely translated into one another”, Beck invites us to think about the painting Mona Lisa

and the following question: how could we precisely translate the content(s) of Mona Lisa?

Maybe we could give some linguistic descriptions, but “it seems hopeless to acquire the level

of detail that the painting conveys.”(Beck, 2013, p. 536)18 If we go to a micro level, then lin-

guistic instructions on how to duplicate the painting are still diﬀerent from the content of the

painting itself. Diﬀerent representational formats diﬀer in the modes of composition—“the

primitive parts and the rules that govern how those parts can be combined” (Beck, 2013,

p. 537) If two media of representation have similarities in the modes of composition, then

indeterminacy in translation could be reduced, because there are few plausible translations

between them. If two media of representations have diﬀerent modes of composition, then

the possibilities for diﬀerent plausible translations make it very hard to precisely translate

between them.

The second claim Beck argues is that animals’ cognitive representations have diﬀerent

modes of composition, which are non-linguistic and not expressible in human language.

Beck starts his explanation by concerning natural numbers, which are in digit form. “7”

and “8”are distinct numbers. So are “1” and “2”. Discriminating “7” from “8” is not harder

than discriminating “1” from “2”. However, if we put them into the analog format, discrimi-

nating the ﬁrst pair (which is to discriminate between “_______” and “________”)

is more diﬃcult than discriminating the second pair (which is to discriminate between “_”

and “__”). These non-digital states are called analog magnitude states. If animals have a

diﬀerent system for understanding numbers than ours, then it is no surprise that we cannot

18But this is also a place where Beck’s Realism could be challenged, as I will discuss more in the next

section.

9

accurately translate what animals think. Moreover, animals’ cognitive representations could

also be in the form of cognitive maps or tree-like structures. Beck cites the work of Michael

Rescorla.19 According to Rescorla, cognitive maps have a diﬀerent mode of composition. It

is governed by “the axioms of a recognized geometry, such as that of a metric space”. (Beck,

2013, p. 540) Since the representations of cognitive maps have parts and rules that are diﬀer-

ent than those of natural language, based on the ﬁrst claim Beck has already established, we

cannot precisely translate the content of the animals’ thought into natural language. Similar

argument could also go through if we understand animals’ cognitive representations to be

tree-like, which is argued in Camp (2009a). Thus, nonlinguistic formats of animals’ cogni-

tive representations (including analog magnitude states, cognitive maps, tree-like structures)

explain why we cannot accurately translate animal thoughts into natural language.

Beck also provides a second argument for animals’ non-linguistic cognitive representation:

the lack of linguistic presentation provides an explanation of why animals cannot have logical

inference. Beck says “sentence-like representations are the ideal vehicles for logical inference.

If animals are really incapable of performing logical inferences, their cognitive representations

are thus unlikely to have the sort of logical form that is familiar from natural language."(Beck,

2013, p. 541) Based on the current research results20, animals are not able to perform logical

inferences as human do. So animals are unlikely to have linguistic representations.

Compared with animals, humans have no trouble in precisely expressing the contents of

non-linguistic representations. Humans are able to express reliable readings of a thermostat

even if the thermostat is in analog format. Humans are able to perform logical inference

and communicate with each other on what the deductive processes exactly are. The cru-

cial diﬀerence between humans and animals, according to Beck, is that the non-linguistic

representations of animals cannot be translated into human’s natural language. Therefore,

even “if a lion could talk, we could still not understand him”.21 The theses of Realism and

19(See Rescorla, 2009a,b)
20See Bermúdez (2003); Penn and Povinelli (2007).
21See Beck (2013), which cites Wittgenstein (1953).

10

Indeterminacy are both true. Although both Beck’s arguments seem convincing, I do think

one step in Beck’s ﬁrst argument needs more analysis, which is my focus in the next section.

3.2 A Problem of Realism

In this section I show a problem for Realism. It is about Beck’s claim that “representations

of diﬀerent formats cannot be precisely translated into one another”, which I summarized

in the last section. Beck uses the painting Mona Lisa as an example. In order to “trans-

late” the painting into natural language, we may give the following as one of the many

descriptions—“Lisa del Giocondo is smiling slyly”. But Beck points out that this linguis-

tic expression cannot reach the level of precision the original painting has, because “there

are many ways to smile slyly”(Beck, 2013, p. 536). Therefore, we cannot translate picture

precisely into the format of natural language.

In response, I think Beck ignores the prevalence of linguistic vagueness. We have a

lot of vague concepts in natural language, for instance, “being rich”, “being bald”, “being

a mountain”, etc. So it seems that in natural language sometime we cannot reach the

perfect level of precision. However, we can still communicate in natural language about these

concepts without too much trouble. An interpretivist might claim that for a certain level of

precision, as long as it serves our practical purposes successfully, we can accept it. Thus in

Mona Lisa, we can still describe “Lisa del Giocondo is crossing her arms in front”, “Lisa del

Giocondo is smiling slyly”, etc. In the context where a curator in the Louvre introduces the

painting Mona Lisa to a visually impaired person or someone cannot see it clearly because it

is blocked by a ﬂock of tourists, these descriptions are acceptable. Therefore, interpretivists

can argue against Beck on this issue.22 Nevertheless, compared with Realism, interpretivism

suﬀers from much more problems, which I will show in the next part of my paper.

22Beck is not against the vagueness of concepts per se, and he actually thinks that “many if not most of
the determinate thoughts we think involve vague concepts.”Beck (2012b, p. 20) However, these determinate
thoughts are about linguistic formats, and not about non-linguistic formats. Interpretivists will not have
this worry because they concern more about the practical success and does not embrace the same level
of precision as Beck does. For more work on the vagueness of concepts (or “proto-concepts”) for animal
thoughts, see Proust (2009).

11

4

Interpretivism Refuted

4.1 Beck’s argument against interpretivism

In this section, I look at Beck’s argument against interpretivism and try to construct a

reply from the perspective of interpretivism. Beck’s argument against interpretivism goes as

follows:

[I]nterpretivists expect ideal interpreters to reach divergent conclusions about
the contents of any animal’s cognitive representations, they conclude that there
is simply no fact of the matter about which of a range of contents an animal
“really” has. Yet while these views...are diﬃcult to reconcile with the many ﬂour-
ishing research programs in cognitive ethology and animal psychology whose ex-
planations of animal behavior are structured around an appeal to real cognitive
representations with determinate contents. Those impressed by these research
programs are thus likely to maintain that animals have cognitive representations
whose contents are not necessarily co-extensive with the judgments of an inter-
preter.(Beck, 2013, p. 521)

As Beck points out, interpretivism takes the contents of animals’ cognitive representations

to be co-extensive with the judgments of an ideal interpreter. But Beck says this is not the

assumption in the ﬁelds of cognitive ethology and animal psychology, which take a Realist

perspective and hold the success of a belief ascription to an animal is a match between the

content of the belief ascription and the content of the animal’s cognitive representations in its

own brain. If cognitive ethology and animal psychology start with Jamieson’s interpretivism,

then merely observing an animal from an interpreter’s perspective would be suﬃcient to

decide what cognitive representations an animal exactly has. Such observations might lead to

divergent conclusions, but the content of animal’s cognitive representation should be uniquely

described and cannot be divergent. Thus interpretivism as a theoretical assumption is not

coherent with these currently successful and inﬂuential disciplines. Therefore, interpretivism

is not acceptable. In the next section, I consider possible replies from Jamieson.

12

4.2 Jamieson’s Replies

4.2.1

“Good Enough”?

In this section, I consider how Jamieson would reply to the worry I raise in the last section.

I think Jamieson is not without options. He could stick to his interpretivism and avoid

the problem by emphasizing on the truth-maker of mental state ascriptions. According to

interpretivism, the truth-maker of belief ascriptions is the practical success in predicting

animals’ behaviors. The criteria of “success” varies across diﬀerent contexts. In Fido’s case,

the ascription “Fido believes there is a meaty bone in the backyard” is good enough to

successfully explain and predict Fido’s behaviors, so the belief ascription is literally true. In

terms of how precise these ascriptions have to be, Jamieson says,

Of course, more questions can be asked, and in some cases answers can be given
but in others they cannot. Attributions can be more or less ﬁnely honed and
precisely shaped, but for most purposes the answer that I gave at the outset
(and Stich came to doubt) is good enough. (Jamieson, 2009, p. 32)

One worry we may still have on this passage is: does Jamieson concede himself to instrumen-

talism? It seems that he is only concerned about whether the belief ascriptions are useful

or not in a variety of contexts. How could he still hold onto the interpretivist doctrine that

belief ascriptions could be literally true? I think in response to this worry, he may argue

that since the practical success is regimented diﬀerently in diﬀerent contexts, whether a par-

ticular ascription is true or not also varies across diﬀerent contexts. Maybe in some cases

(for instance, in everyday interactions between a dog and its owner), multiple ascriptions

could be all true in the same context. But in some other cases where we need a higher

level of precision and a higher standard of predictive success (for instance, in the research

of cognitive ethology and animal psychology), there is only one true ascription. In order

to decide what exactly the animal thinks, the ideal interpreter needs to consider as many

stimuli and the animal’s corresponding responses as possible.

One immediate question we can ask Jamieson then becomes: how to uniquely decide

13

what the truth ascription is? In the practices of cognitive ethology and animal psychology,

why do not we just follow Realism and take the success to be the match between the contents

of belief ascriptions and the contents of animals’ cognitive representations in their brains?

If there is no better understanding of “success” here, interpretivism still has to concede to

realism. Jamieson does not provide a direct response to this worry, but I think Jamieson’s

discussion on the “choosing-a-number” game could help us construe a possible response on

behalf of him. In the next section, I show what the “choosing-a-number” game is and why a

possible response on behalf of Jamieson does not help him.

4.2.2 The “Choosing-a-number” Game

Jamieson introduces this case when developing an argument against Beck’s Realism. The

“choosing-a-number” game goes as follows,

"We both think that I can determine the content of my thought in such a way
that I can think of a number and you can be right or wrong when you guess which
number it is. You don’t reject the question out of hand on the grounds that I
can’t actually perform the task of thinking of such a number. We both think
that I can determine the content of my thought in such a way that I can think
of a number and you can be right or wrong when you guess which number it is.
In this case there seems to be some brute content about what I am thinking."
(Jamieson, 2009, p. 28)

In this game, both players agree that there is a fact of the matter on what the content

of my thought is. Suppose the number I need my adversary to guess is 9. My thought

is, “I am thinking of the number 9”. My adversary’s only way to succeed is to match her

guess with the my thought—she needs to guess 9. Now if this “choosing-a-number” example

sounds plausible, then it seems that in many real-life cases, interpretivism may successfully

attribute mental states to a subject (in terms of its predictive success), but the answer is

just ﬂat-out false, because the answer fails to match with the thought that the subject really

has. So interpretivism becomes an unstable position: it has to concede either to Realism, or

instrumentalism/eliminativism.

14

In response to this kind of example, Jamieson’s explanation is to “quarantine these

thoughts”.(Jamieson, 2009, p. 33)23 In other words, these thoughts (for instance, “I am

thinking of number 9”) are not central to animal thoughts. The beliefs central to animals’

lives and their survival are not in that explicit form. That is, animals do not play choosing-

a-number games for survival. We mostly ascribe beliefs to animals in situations that are

pertinent to their survival and most animals’ everyday activities are mainly for the purpose

of survival, so we do not need to adopt the approach of the choosing-a-number games when

ascribing belief to animals. Maybe this kind of game and this way of thinking are endemic

among human beings, but it is not the case for language-less infants and non-human animals.

But Jamieson’s defense is not convincing. The problem is, he hasn’t provided an expla-

nation of why we should not assume the existence of similar thoughts in the activities that

are pertinent for survival. The burden of proof is on him. Moreover, on the contrary, the

Realist assumption has been adopted by cognitive ethology and animal psychology and it

brings a lot of success. For instance, researchers on animals’ theory of mind have shown

that some primates could have second-order beliefs and are even able to pass the false belief

tasks.24 These experiments tap into capacities that are crucial to the survival of the tested

subjects. By a variety of research methods, like eye-tracking and diﬀerent types of condi-

tioning, researchers could arguably identify what the animal is exactly thinking. In other

words, the researchers and the experiment subjects are playing a “choosing-a-belief” game,

where the researchers use many diﬀerent methods to guess what the contents of the subject’s

cognitive representations exactly are. Therefore, Jamieson is false in claiming that animals

do not have contentful cognitive representations in the activities that serve the purpose of

survival.

So far we have seen that Jamieson fails to respond to Beck’s worry. In the next section,

I give more explanations on why interpretivism fails on these issues. I show that Jamieson’s

23He also provides another explanation, which has a stronger eliminativist ﬂavor, but even Jamieson
himself takes it to be “even less plausible” (Jamieson, 2009, p. 34). So I only focus on his preferred
explanation here.

24(See Krupenye et al., 2016)

15

interpretivism is ﬂawed in both metaphysical and epistemological aspects.

4.3 Truth and Truthmakers

In this part, I show the metaphysical and epistemological problems of Jamieson’s interpre-

tivism. I argue that interpretivism misunderstand what truth and truthmakers really are in

our belief ascriptions to animals.

4.3.1 The Metaphysical Worry

My ﬁrst worry to interpretivism is from a metaphysical aspect. It concerns the following

question:

(*) Is there some fact of the matter about exactly what animals think on partic-

ular occasions?

Jamieson also asks the same question. According to him, if one’s answer to (*) is yes, then

she would be a “brute-content” theorist.25 Now Jamieson’s answer to (*) is no. Does his

answer make him an instrumentalist or an eliminativist? He is silent on this issue. To give

him a more charitable reading, I think his silence shows that he does not need a clear answer

to (*). There may or may not be some fact of matter on what animal is really thinking,

but it does not aﬀect interpretivists’ conclusion, because an interpretivist could refute to

talk about “content” in any serious ways and just use practical success to decide whether an

ascription is true or not. In other words, we can have a truthmaker without being explicit

about what truth is. But I cannot see how Jamieson defends this position. To give him a

more charitable reading, we can take him to be in a position that is dismissive on what the

25According to Jamieson, aﬃrmative answer to (*) is the exact formulation of the brute-content view.
See (Jamieson, 2009, p. 26). Jamieson divides the brute-content view into two categories. One is the
"brain-writing" view, according to which animals have a “language of thought” or “some other system of
mental representation encoded in the nervous systems of all those creatures (human and non-human) who
have thoughts." (ibid.) The second version of the brute-content view claims that animals have the capability
of introspecting and knowing what it believes by introspection, but the content of animal’s thought can only
be approached by introspection. (ibid.)

16

nature of mental content really is. If there is no such thing clearly deﬁned as mental content

for animals (and humans), then (*) could be dissolved. That is, we do not need to concern

the metaphysical fact before attributing beliefs to animals. But this view is seriously ﬂawed

too. Now I show why.

Jamieson’s reason is that he takes the word “content” to be a metaphor and he claims

the concept of “content” itself needs further explication. He says,

[L]ike all metaphors, it drags along its own presuppositions and associations
like uninvited houseguests...we have not done enough to subject this metaphor
to scrutiny, and, as it might be said, the unexamined metaphor is not worth
deploying.(Jamieson, 2009, p. 24)

Jamieson does not provide more explanations on why he says so. But we can take a look at

how Beck use the word “content” and analyze whether Jamieson will accept Beck’s usage.

Beck explicitly use the word “content” in his formulation of (1’), which is supposed to be a

variation of (1) proposed by Jamieson. I reiterate their diﬀerent formulations here:

(1) Many animals think.(Jamieson, 2009, p. 16)

(1’) Realism: animals have causally eﬃcacious cognitive representations with

determinate contents.(Beck, 2013, p. 521)

As we can see, Beck has no problem in using the word “content” for the claim of Realism. I

think Jamieson should agree with Beck’s usage of the word “content”, if Jamieson understands

“content” in a commonsensical way. The commonsensical way is that contents are just what

animals think. Whenever an animal thinks, it cannot think about nothing. It has to think

about something. The “something” is arguably what the commonsensical notion of “content”

is. Since Jamieson is interested in the issue on “what animal thinks”, he should be ﬁne

with the commonsensical understanding of the content of animals’ thoughts too. Moreover,

Jamieson also understands “thoughts” in a commonsensical way, which shows that he is

not against a commonsensical approach with regards to terminologies. So the burden is on

Jamieson to show why he adamantly refuses to use the word “content”.

17

Now even if we allow Jamieson to keep his discussion going while avoiding the use of

“content”, there is still an epistemological worry for his interpretivism, which I explore in the

next section.

4.3.2 The Epistemological Worry

When Jamieson argues against the brute-content view, he provides this following epistemo-

logical puzzle,

(†) How could we construe knowledge of the minds of others?26

Since the brute-content view takes mental content to be some Language of Thoughts that is

literally “written” in the brain or only accessible through personal introspection, in order to
answer (†), brute-content view might rely on ﬁrst-person reports or brain scan to determine
what other humans or non-human animals think. However, Jamieson points out that there is

an intimate connection between a subject’s behavior and its mental state. That is, behaviors

of a subject provide direct information on what the subject’s mental states are,

Imagine that someone is in the presence of a dog. The person is grimacing, recoil-
ing, and trembling. His blood pressure, respiration, and pulse are all elevated. It
is diﬃcult to imagine that we would give up our claim that the person was afraid
of the dog simply on the basis of his denial, or even for that matter on the basis
of a brain scan that proposed to show that what was inscribed in the person’s
brain was that he liked the dog and wanted to pet her. (Jamieson, 2009, p. 29)

According to Jamieson, this way of analyzing the person’s mental states could be used in
analyzing non-human animals’ mental states as well. However, Jamieson’s answer to (†) in
the quoted passage is problematic, because it fails to consider the possibility of misguided

information from behavioral input.27 To illustrate this worry, let’s consider the famous

example of Clever Hans,

26See (Jamieson, 2009, p. 28), where he says “there are various technical problems in formulating brute
content views, but for many people the greatest obstacle to accepting them concerns the way in which they
construe knowledge of our own minds and the minds of others.”

27which I take to be one of the classical reasons behaviorism fails. For a detailed introduction and reasons

why most philosophers reject it, see Graham (2016).

18

In the early twentieth century a Russian trotting horse named Hans amazed
crowds by his ability to do mathematical calculations, read German, and recog-
nize musical notes. Hans could respond to a verbal request to, say, add two plus
three by tapping his hoof on the ground ﬁve times....Oskar Pfungst investigated
Hans’ behavior more closely, and found that Hans’ owner was inadvertently cuing
Hans to start and stop tapping his foot. Hans was clever all right, but not in the
way the crowds thought. (Andrews, 2014, p. 28)

If we follow Jamieson’s reasoning, it seems that we would think Hans has real cognitive

abilities of doing mathematical calculations. Hans’ seemingly mathematical abilities can be

“veriﬁed” by his responses to diﬀerent stimuli (behavioral inputs). According to Jamieson’s

criteria, attributing Hans the belief “I believe 2+3=5” is practically successful, because as-

suming Hans’ capability of doing math can reliably predict Hans’ behaviors. However, after

more careful studies on Hans, we will ﬁnd out that it is not the case. Hans cannot do

mathematical calculations at all.

Now even if Jamieson defends himself by saying the ﬂaws in Clever Hans are because we

haven’t used enough cues, there is still another problem for Jamieson on accessing animals’

mental states merely by behavioral observations: maybe sometimes when an animal is think-

ing, it does not have any corresponding behavior at all. We can think of an example where

Fido thinks “there is a meaty bone in the backyard” but he does not have any behaviors at

all. Maybe Fido is not hungry, or maybe Fido perceives some competitor in the backyard,

etc. But Fido still has the belief “there is a meaty bone in the backyard”. According to

Jamieson, there is no need to attribute Fido the belief, because the attribution does not

connect with any practical success in predicting his behaviors. But that is clearly not the

case, because we assume Fido has that belief.28

28That is also why stimulus-independence suggested by Elisabeth Camp is important. As Camp points
out, what is important for animal thought is stimulus-independence instead of responses to diﬀerent stimuli.
Animals with the capability of thinking are able to have cognitive representations beyond the representations
of what is in fact the case. She says, “creature with just basic cognition are capable of transcending their
current circumstances to represent absent situations, and not merely as responding diﬀerentially to immediate
stimuli.” (See Camp (2009b)).

19

5 Conclusion

By now I have shown what the seeming tension between (1) and (2) (and correspondingly,

(1’) and (2’)) really is and how interpretivists and Realists provide diﬀerent answers to

the tension. I have also examined whether interpretivism and Realism, as general theories

on the mental states of non-human animals, are plausible or not.

I indicate there is one

problem in Beck’s Realist argument for the incompatibility between (1’) and (2’) . That

is, interpretivism has the advantage over Realism on how to translate between modes of

composition. However, compared with Realism, interpretivism has much more problems, as

I have illustrated in part 4. Interpretivism cannot be used as a fundamental assumption in

contemporary practice of cognitive ethology and animal psychology, and it has ﬂaws in both

metaphysical and epistemological aspects. Thus interpretivism needs to be rejected.

20

Bibliography

Andrews, Kristin. 2014. The Animal Mind: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Animal

Cognition. Routledge.

Beck, Jacob. 2012a. “Do Animals Engage in Conceptual Thought?” Philosophy Compass

7:218–229.

—. 2012b. “The Generality Constraint and the Structure of Thought.” Mind 121:563–600.

—. 2013. “Why We Can’t Say What Animals Think.” Philosophical Psychology 26:520–546.

Bermúdez, José Luis. 2003. Thinking without words. Oxford University Press.

Bugnyar, Thomas, Reber, Stephan A, and Buckner, Cameron. 2016. “Ravens attribute visual

access to unseen competitors.” Nature communications 7.

Camp, Elisabeth. 2009a. “A Language of Baboon Thought?” In Robert W. Lurz (ed.), The

Philosophy of Animal Minds, 108–127. Cambridge University Press.

—. 2009b.

“Putting Thoughts to Work: Concepts, Systematicity, and Stimulus-

Independence.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 78:275–311.

Churchland, Paul M. 1981. “Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes.” Jour-

nal of Philosophy 78:67–90.

Crisp, Roger. 1996.

“Evolution and Psychological Unity.”

In Marc Bekoﬀ and Dale W.

Jamieson (eds.), Readings in Animal Cognition, 309–321. MIT Press.

Dennett, Daniel C. 1987. The Intentional Stance. MIT Press.

—. 1991. “Real Patterns.” Journal of Philosophy 88:27–51.

—. 1995.

“Do Animals Have Beliefs?”

In H. Roitblat and Jean-Arcady Meyer (eds.),

Comparative Approaches to Cognitive Science. MIT Press.

Fodor, Jerry A and Pylyshyn, Zenon W. 1988. “Connectionism and cognitive architecture:

A critical analysis.” Cognition 28:3–71.

Graham, George. 2016. “Behaviorism.” In Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia

of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, fall 2016 edition.

Jamieson, Dale. 1998. “Science, Knowledge, and Animal Minds.” Proceedings of the Aris-

21

totelian Society 98:79–102.

—. 2009. “What Do Animals Think?” In Robert W. Lurz (ed.), The Philosophy of Animal

Minds, 15–34. Cambridge University Press.

Jamieson, Dale and Bekoﬀ, Marc. 1992.

“On Aims and Methods of Cognitive Ethology.”

Philosophy of Science Association 1992:110–124.

Krupenye, Christopher, Kano, Fumihiro, Hirata, Satoshi, Call, Josep, and Tomasello,

Michael. 2016.

“Great apes anticipate that other individuals will act according to false

beliefs.” Science 354:110–114.

Penn, Derek C and Povinelli, Daniel J. 2007. “Causal cognition in human and nonhuman

animals: A comparative, critical review.” Psychology 58.

Proust, Joëlle. 2009.

“The representational basis of brute metacognition: a proposal.”

In

Robert W. Lurz (ed.), The Philosophy of Animal Minds, 165–183. Cambridge University

Press.

Rescorla, Michael. 2009a. “Chrysippus’ Dog as a Case Study in Non-Linguistic Cognition.”

In Robert W. Lurz (ed.), The Philosophy of Animal Minds, 52–71. Cambridge University

Press.

—. 2009b. “Cognitive Maps and the Language of Thought.” British Journal for the Philos-

ophy of Science 60:377–407.

Stich, Stephen P. 1979.

“Do Animals Have Beliefs?” Australasian Journal of Philosophy

57:15–28.

Taylor, Alex H, Miller, Rachael, and Gray, Russell D. 2012. “New Caledonian crows reason

about hidden causal agents.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109:16389–

16391.

Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. Macmillan.

22


