Jeremy Yuanming Shi 
Final Paper for PHIL 507 Social and Political Philosophy 
12/11/15 
5806 words 
 
 

Epistemic Justice and First-Person Egalitarianism 

Egalitarianism is the idea that in distributive justice human beings should “be treated as 

equals in some respect” (See Arneson 2013, Dworkin 2000). Depending on what should 

be distributed, how to distribute equally, and the types of theoretical justification, there 

are  different  kinds  of  egalitarianism.  One  popular  account  of  egalitarianism  is  Luck 

Egalitarianism (hereafter LE). It suggests that inequalities are just if and only if they are 

not due to luck. To put it in a more precise form, if the inequalities could not be traced 

back to agents’ choices, then it is unjust. On the contrary, if the inequalities could be 

traced back to the choices of different agents, these inequalities are just. (Sher 2014, 1)  

Two  other  versions  of  egalitarianism  challenge  the  ideas  of  LE.  In  his  book 

Equality for Inegalitarians, George Sher argues against LE and gives his own version of 

egalitarianism  by  taking  a  sufficientarian  approach.  Another  well-discussed  kind  of 

egalitarianism  is  from  Elizabeth  Anderson.  She  emphasizes  on  the  equality  of  social 

relations  among  citizens  and  names  her  account  “Democratic  Egalitarianism”. 

Depending on the attitude for how to consider the (un)equal relations among citizens, 

different  theories  of  egalitarianism  could  be  divided  to  relational  and  non-relational: 

Democratic  Egalitarianism  is  relational  whereas  the  other  two  versions  are  non-

	

1 

relational. Anderson also makes the distinction between egalitarianism from a second-

person perspective and a third-person perspective: Democratic Egalitarianism focuses 

more  on  relations  and  the  inequality  between  different  citizens  whereas  LE  takes  the 

stance  on  inequality  from  a  third-person  perspective.  In  this  paper,  I  extend  this 

distinction  and  show  that  since  he  bases  human’s  equal  moral  status  and  sufficiency 

threshold on the consciousness from a first-personal subjective, we could name Sher’s 

egalitarianism first-person egalitarianism.  

Now the puzzle is: with the concerns on the difference between relational and 

non-relational egalitarianism, and compare these three versions (third-person, second-

person, and first-person perspectives) of egalitarianism, which one should we prefer? 

We first rule out LE since it suffers from a variety kind of classical objections. Then I 

argue  in  this  paper  that  comparing  relational  and  non-relational  accounts  of 

egalitarianism,  Anderson’s  Democratic  Egalitarianism  is  preferable  than  Sher’s  first-

person egalitarianism. My conclusion is mainly based on the argument that relational 

equality is more important because of its promotion in epistemic justice.  

The philosophical discussions on epistemic (in)justice are largely shaped by the 

work  of  Miranda  Fricker,  who  argues  that  social  powers  influence  agents’  epistemic 

abilities and thereby bring so-called “epistemic injustice”. Compared with Anderson’s 

Democratic Egalitarianism, Sher’s non-relational account lacks a concern for epistemic 

injustice.  As  a  result,  if  the  considerations  of  epistemic  justice  matter  in  distributive 

	

2 

justice, a relational account of egalitarianism—Anderson’s Democratic Egalitarianism—

is preferable.  

The following is the basic structure of my paper. In the first part, I review three 

different  kinds  of  egalitarianism:  Luck  Egalitarianism,  Anderson’s  Democratic 

Egalitarianism,  and  Sher’s  first-person  egalitarianism.  I  also  explain  the  differences 

between relational and non-relational accounts of egalitarianism. Next I show the core 

ideas of epistemic justice introduced by Fricker. In the third part I show how epistemic 

injustice is relevant in the discussion of distributive justice and why it is a problem for 

Sher’s  version  of  egalitarianism.  In  the  last  part,  I  consider  and  respond  to  some 

possible objections on my criticism to Sher.  

 

1. Three Kinds of Egalitarianism 

1.1   Luck Egalitarianism (LE)  

LE usually could be traced back to the works from Ronald Dworkin. In his essay 

“What is Equality” (Dworkin 1981), Dworkin gives an account of egalitarianism based 

on  resources.  He  also  makes  the  distinction  between  brute  luck  and  option  luck. 

Roughly, option luck is luck that results from each agent’s voluntary choices, and brute 

luck  is  luck  that  each  agent  cannot  reasonably  avoid.  According  to  LE,  a  just 

distribution of social goods should reflect an elimination of the effect from brute luck 

and keep the inequalities that result from agents’ choice (option luck). Similarly with 

3 

	

Dworkin, G.A.Cohen argues that the fundamental aim of egalitarianism is to neutralize 

the  influence  of  luck:  “For  anyone  who  thinks  that  initial  advantage  and  inherent 

capacity are unjust distributors thinks so because he believes that they make a person’s 

fate depend too much on sheer luck”(Cohen 1989, 932) Different from Dworkin, Cohen 

suggests that we should all have equal access to advantages rather than only resources.  

Depending  on  how  to  neutralize  luck,  LE  could  be  divided  into  two  camps: 

desert-catering 

luck 

egalitarianism 

(DCLE)  and 

responsibility-catering 

luck 

egalitarianism (RCLE). DCLE contrasts luck with desert. “It claims to advance equality 

by neutralizing inequalities that are not deserved, while allowing inequalities that track 

differential merit.” (Anderson, 2008) RCLE contracts luck with responsibility. “It claims 

to  advance  equality  by  equalizing  assets  for  which  we  are  not  responsible,  but  holds 

individuals responsible for outcomes that are the product of their market choices. On 

this view, unlucky distributions are unjust because they are the outcome of causes not 

connected  to  conduct  for  which  the  individual  is  responsible.”  (Anderson  2007)  Both 

DCLE and RCLE suffer from several objections: first, we might treasure social solidity 

when concerning distributive justice. We should have equal relations between different 

members  in  the  society.  But  LE  does  not  take  it  to  be  the  main  goal  of  equality. 

Moreover, LE seems to be too harsh for the persons with bad option luck. For example, 

an equal society based on LE will let a motorcycle suffer from the server consequence of 

a  traffic  accident  although  his  misfortune  comes  from  his  own  choice  and  he  is 

	

4 

responsible for it.  Another objection to LE is that in LE’s framework, the pity the state 

gives to the “badly-off” people is condescending and patronizing.  

1.2 Democratic Egalitarianism 

Different from DCLE and RCLE, Elizabeth Anderson gives a version of egalitarianism 

that  concerns  both  compensating  market  risks  and  promoting  social  solidarity. 

According to Anderson, the real point of equality is to create “a democratic society, in 

which people stand in relations of equality to one another.” (Anderson 1999) It concerns 

security rather than just desert and responsibility, she says, “unlucky distributions are 

unjust  insofar  as  they  disrupt  egalitarian  levels  of  security  to  which  individuals  are 

entitled  because  they  need  them  to  stand  in  relations  of  equality  with  others.” 

(Anderson 2007) According to Anderson, principles of justice need to be justified from a 

second-person  perspective  instead  of  a  third-person  perspective.  To  be  more  specific, 

egalitarianism  is  fundamentally  concerned  with  equality  of  social  relationships.  In  a 

third-personal justification, someone presents a body of normative and factual premises 

as  grounds  for  a  policy  conclusion.  (Anderson  2010,  2)  The  identity  of  the  person 

making the argument and the identity of her audience are irrelevant to the justification. 

(Anderson  2010,  3)  The  second-person  perspective  of  justification  follows  from 

contractualism,  according  to  which  “a  claim  of  justice  is  essentially  expressible  as  a 

demand  that  a  person  makes  on  an  agent  whom  the  speaker  holds  accountable.” 

Justification  from  second-person  perspective  “is  a  matter  of  vindicating  claims  on 

	

5 

others' conduct.” (Anderson 2010, 3) A main reason for the failure of the doctrines of LE 

is that it cannot be vindicated from a second-person standpoint.   

So  what  kind  of  society  is  Anderson  expecting?  In  her  account,  a  just  society 

should  get  rid  of  social  hierarchies  including  hierarchies  of  esteem,  hierarchies  of 

power,  and  hierarchies  of  standing.  To  use  her  own  words,  egalitarianism  should 

“prevent the conversion of wealth inequality into an unjust social hierarchy, and ensure 

that  everyone  in  society  has  enough  to  stand  in  relations  of  equality  to  others.” 

(Anderson 2007, 263) 

Democratic  Egalitarianism  is  a  version  of  relational  egalitarianism,  the  ideal  of 

which  focuses  on  the  terms  of  our  interactions,  rather  than  on  comparisons  of  the 

amount  of  some  good  that  different  individuals  enjoy.  Equality  in  social  relations 

should involve social equals to be “regarded as self-originating sources of claims”, “enjoy 

equal standing in discussions aimed at defining the terms of their interactions”, and “live on 

terms of reciprocity with one another, none imposing conditions on others they would 

reject  for  themselves”,  and  “enjoy  personal  independence.”  (Anderson,  2007)  Moreover, 

based on the equality in social relations, Democratic Egalitarians can add more detailed 

distributive  constraints  on  the  bottom,  top,  and  middle  level  of  distributive  justice:  a 

“safety net” should be added to the people in the bottom level; the state should make 

sure  the  well-off  does  not  buy  power  and  turn  the  country  into  meritocracy;  for  the 

	

6 

middle-class,  social  insurances  should  be  provided  in  order  to  prevent  them  from 

falling into poverty.   

1.3   Sher’s First-person Egalitarianism  

Sher’s  theory  is  developed  against  a  background  of  discussions  about  LE.  The 

substantial  divergence  of  his  theory  from  LE  is  due  to  the  additions  of  a  different 

argument  on  equal  moral  status  and  a  sufficientarian  consideration1.  In  his  book 

Equality  for  Inegalitarians,  Sher  first  distinguishes  two  kinds  of  justification  of  LE: 

pluralistic  and  monistic.  Since  LE  is  formulated  as  a  claim  with  two  conjuncts: 

inequality is just when “chosen by agents”; inequality is unjust when not “chosen by 

agents”,  depending  on  whether  using  the  same  justification  to  these  two  different 

conjuncts,  we  can  divide  the  justifications  into  pluralistic  and  monistic.  Pluralistic 

justifications  usually  appeal  to  desert  or  responsibility  in  our  choices  to  explain  the 

permissible  cases  of  injustice.   In  chapter  2  and  Chapter  3,  Sher  argues  against  both 

desert-catering LE and responsibility-catering LE, and concludes that neither of which 

could  completely  capture  the  main  ideas  of  LE.  In  chapter  4,  he  shows  Dworkin’s 

monist approach is unsuccessful as well.  

With the pluralistic-monistic distinction built and providing arguments on why 

Dworkin’s  pluralistic  justification  fails,  Sher  takes  his  approach  from  a  monistic 

																																																								
	

1 Sufficientarianism  is  an  account  that  suggests  that  the  goal  of  distributive  justice  is  to  distribute 
social goods to pass a threshold for each citizen in the society. See Frankfurt (1987). 
 

7 

perspective. The basis of his monistic justification is the equal moral status of persons. 

In Chapter 5 Why we are moral equals, Sher provides a new justification on why we are all 

moral equals. According to Sher, the equal status of persons is grounded in the fact that 

each person is equally a subject equally equipped with belief, aim, and each person is 

equally able to bring about plans and execute them.” In other words, each person has a 

“subjectivity of a certain sort—that each occupies a point of view from which the world 

appears  a  certain  way,  certain  things  appear  to  matter,  and  certain  courses  of  action 

appear  to  matter,  and  certain  courses  of  action  appear  to  be  open…  each  person  is  a 

world onto himself.” (Sher, 2014, 80) More importantly, his first-personal perspective on 

subjective consciousness is also one of the main reasons why I shall call Sher’s account 

first-person egalitarianism, as I will explain later in the section.  

The next issue is on what should be the “currency” for distributive justice. This is 

another  place  where  Sher  differs  from  luck  egalitarians.  Sher’s  account  adopts  a 

perfectionist idea of life, which takes the social distribution needs to make each person 

“live one’s life effectively”, which is a person’s fundamental interest. Sher says “each 

person's most fundamental interest consists precisely of living the sort of life that his 

form that his form of mental organization makes possible”. (Sher 2013, 94) The political 

philosophy  drawn  from  this  account  is  that a  just  society  is  where  its  “members 

sufficiently  able  to  live  their  lives  effectively,  and  the  relevant  form  of  effectiveness 

involves, among other things, the ability to recognize the ends that one in fact has most 

	

8 

reason  to  seek.”  (Sher  2013,  128)  But  a  further  question  is:  how  to  determine  such  a 

sufficiency  level?  Sher’s  answer  is  that  the  state  needs  to  “provide  each  citizen  with 

enough leverage to enable him to acquire further leverage without inordinate difficulty 

or  sacrifice.”(Sher  2013,  140)  Each  citizen  should  be  equipped  with  “access  to  some 

combination of resources and opportunities that makes it possible for him to ascend to 

increasingly higher levels of resources and opportunities without having to do things 

that cannot be reasonably be expected of him.”(Sher 2013, 141) 

In Sher’s theory, different people have unequal amounts of fundamental goods, 

so why do we still consider it to be an egalitarian theory? Here is his explanation, “as 

long as each individual has reached his personal upper limit, and so it fully able to live 

any life that could be his, each agent will indeed have the same amount of the relevant 

good” (Sher 2014, 169) With this egalitarian component built, although there still exists 

inequality, Sher’s theory could be categorized into the camp of egalitarianism because 

people are equal in the sense that they are all brought up to personal maximal sufficient 

level. If all people are brought up to their maxima, them it’s equal and just. 2 

It should also be noted that Sher’s egalitarianism is relational rather than non-

relational.  Relational  egalitarianism  holds  that  “inequality  is  in  itself,  either  bad  or 

unjust.” (Parfit, 2000, 106), whereas non-relational egalitarianism accepts the views like 

																																																								
	

2 It would be helpful to think this account through an analogy with nutrition.  Different people need 
different amount of calories because of different digesting capabilities. “Aristotle’s wrestler, Milo, 
who needs and consumes 5,000 calories a day, will have no more of the good than a sedentary clerk 
who needs and consumes 2, 500”. (Sher 2014, 168) 

9 

priority which merely have “a built-in bias toward equality”. (Sher 2014, 170n.)  With 

this distinction, Sher says his view “is clearly not a relational view because it doesn’t 

say that there’s anything at all inherently wrong or bad about one person having more 

of any good than another” (ibid.), but his view has more bias because “it asserts that 

everyone who reaches the effectiveness threshold definitely will occupy the same relative 

position on the continuum of levels of effectiveness that he could achieve.”(ibid.) 

The  distinctive  part  that  makes  this  theory  first-person  egalitarianism  is  the 

starting  point  of  Sher’s  argument  and  the  sufficiency  threshold.  Recall  LE  is  a  third-

person egalitarianism because its justification is directly through factual and normative 

claims without the considerations of the identity of the person or audience. Democratic 

Egalitarianism,  or  relational  egalitarianism  in  general  is  from  a  second-personal 

perspective:  its  justification  emphasizes  and  relies  on  the  relation  people  stand  with 

each other. I call Sher’s version of egalitarianism first-person egalitarianism because it 

derives  the  equal  moral  status  of  persons  from  the  perspective  of  first-personal 

consciousness. Everybody engages with deliberating and planning from a first-personal 

perspective.  Moreover,  the  threshold  level  of  sufficiency  also  varies  based  on  first-

person  concern:  it  depends  on  what  his  personal  “leverage”  is.  Since  this  leverage  is 

indexed on how much resources, opportunities, knowledge and skills each person owns 

for  his  rational  life  plan,  Sher’s  notion  of  sufficiency  level  is  also  first-personal.  To 

explain why some inequalities are just, one can also say each person has a subjective, 

	

10 

first-person word. As long as the distribution fulfills each person’s fundamental first-

person needs (i.e. living his own life effectively), it is just.  

 

2. Epistemic Injustice 

2.1 Definitions 

In her work Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing, Miranda Fricker 

gives scenarios where the social power might influence our knowledge. Fricker claims 

that besides traditional social goods like welfare, resources, and opportunities, citizens 

also need a special kind of goods: “epistemic goods”. There are often cases where this 

kind of goods is distributed unequally and there are two kinds of epistemic injustice: 

testimonial injustice and hermeneutical injustice.  

Testimonial injustice happens when “prejudice cause a hearer to give a deflated 

level  of  credibility  to  a  speaker’s  word”.  (Fricker  2007,  1)  Speaker  suffers  from 

testimonial  justice  when  the  prejudice  cause  “the  hearer  has  less  credibility  than  he 

would otherwise have given.”(Ficker 2007, 1) An example of testimonial injustice is that 

a police misjudge a person because of the person’s irrelevant factor (age, race, etc.) A 

more vivid example would be the black man Tom Robinson who is accused of raping a 

white woman from the novel To kill a Mockingbird. Another kind of epistemic injustice is 

hermeneutical  injustice.  It  occurs  when  “a  subject  who  is  already  hermeneutically 

marginalized  (that  is,  they  belong  to  a  group  which  does  not  have  access  to  equal 

11 

	

participation  in  the  generation  of  social  meanings)  is  thereby  put  at  an  unfair 

disadvantage  when  it  comes  to  making  sense  of  a  significant  area  of  their  social 

experience.”  (Fricker  2013,  1319)  An  example  of  hermeneutical  injustice  would  be  a 

woman  who  suffers  from  “sexual  harassment  in  a  culture  that  still  lacks  that  critical 

concept.”  (p.1)3 It  is  caused  by  “structural  prejudice  in  the  economy  of  collective 

hermeneutical resources.” (Ibid.)  

2.2. Mechanisms 

According to Fricker, Epistemic injustice is usually due to a social power that “controls 

others’ actions (Fricker 2007, 5) and brings the results of incredulity, misinterpretation, 

silencing.  As  the  harms  of  epistemic  injustice  grow  deeper,  it  will  make  the  person 

“quite literally, prevented from becoming who they are. ” (Fricker 2007, 5) Given these 

explanations, several questions could still be raised: why do we need such a state with 

epistemic injustice? What do we need “epistemically”, anyway?  

To answer these questions, Fricker borrows Bernard Williams’s notion of State of 

Nature  on  epistemic  needs.  Similarly  with  a  State  of  Nature  built  on  basic  political 

needs, in this “epistemic State of Nature”, we have basic epistemic needs. These needs 

include the need to possess enough truths (and not too many falsehoods) to facilitate 

survival, the need to participate in an epistemic practice whereby information is shared 

or  pooled,  and  the  need  to  encourage  dispositions  in  individuals  that  will  stabilize 

																																																								
	

3 Another good example suggested Fricker (2013) is the use of the word “provocation”. 

12 

relations of trust. (See Fricker 2007, Chap. 5 and Williams 2002)  In this epistemic state 

of nature, we can find the emergent virtue of truth, which represent testimonial justices 

and brings us sincerity and accuracy of beliefs. 

 

3. Criticism to First-Person Egalitarianism 

In  this  section,  I  consider  how  epistemic  injustice  challenges  Sher’s  first-person 

egalitarianism.  My  basic  line  of  thought  is  that  first-person  egalitarianism  puts  too 

much  burden  on  the  agent’s  epistemic  duty.  In  fact,  epistemic  injustice  and  its 

implications in distributive justice are best revealed when we consider the assumption 

that  the  agent  has  abilities  of  making  decisions  and  executing  plans  based  on  his 

appropriate conception and deliberation. 

According the Sher, the most important part of living effectively is coping with 

contingency. But what if the agent—due to the factors that he cannot control (but the 

states might easily be otherwise controlled with an improvement on epistemic justice)—

cannot practice his full ability of ability of coping with contingency? The abilities will be 

significantly ill-formed if the state does nothing about it. Since knowledge matters to a 

people’s life, deliberating from correctly conceived knowledge is an important part of a 

person’s effective life.  

3.1 The Bottom-Up Approach 

	

13 

To elaborate my argument, I first take a bottom-up path and look at three stages 

(deliberative, planning, and executing) that are aspects of the agent’s own constitution. 

There are different factors that could limit agent’s proficiency effectiveness in these 

stages. I focus on the cases of malfunctioning in these stages and argue that we cannot 

ignore the concerns of epistemic justice in them.  

In the deliberative stage, the factors that might negatively affect agents include 

“lack of imagination, ignorance of some crucial fact, shoddiness of his reasoning, lack of 

insight  into  attitudes  and  aptitudes.”  (Sher  2014,  159)    It  seems  that  a  malfunction  of 

these factors are all due to the agent. However, if these factors are all caused or causally 

relevant with testimonial or hermeneutical injustice, is the malfunction still the agent’s 

fault? It is hard to parse out mechanism of the malfunction from the agent’s side to the 

society’s  side.  But  since  the  agent  interacts  with  the  society,  it  is  hard  to  deny  that  a 

better social solidarity would improve the agent’s success in the deliberative stage.  

The second stage is the planning stage. Sher says the malfunctioning agent in this 

stage “may be prevented from finding a way to achieve his ends by any of these factors, 

but also by the inadequacy of his resources or opportunities, his lack of access to some 

necessary  technology,  or  his  inability  to  coordinate  with  others  or  win  their 

cooperation.” (Sher 2014, 159) Hermenutical injustice could prevent the agent in making 

a good plan. It could be the case that he does not understand some concepts because 

they are not equipped to him by the society. It could be the case that others use arcane 

	

14 

words or communicate in an esoteric way that prevents him from further cooperation. 

Discrimination from testimonial injustice could also negatively impact the agent as well.  

The last stage is the execution stage. According to Sher, the agent’s way of going 

forward  and  executing  successfully  “may  again  be  blocked  by  any  of  the  foregoing 

factors, but also by any number of unforeseen events to which he cannot successfully 

adapt  or  adjust.”(Sher  2014,  159)  Consider  hermeneutical  injustice  first:  if  we  cannot 

understand a word correctly, hermeneutical injustice with regards to some words might 

hurt  our  capabilities  in  bringing  about  our  future  plans.  Testimonial  injustice  is 

probably even worse: in social interaction, or in the process of determining our plans, a 

lack  of  credibility  would  affect  how  effective  the  agent  brings  about  his  plan.  Think 

about the cases where other people don’t understand him and won’t interact with him 

without prejudice or discrimination. The agent deliberates correctly, plans in a practical 

wise way, but fails to execute it. Is it entirely the agent’s fault?  

3.2 The Up-Bottom Approach 

Now let us take the up-bottom approach and look at the threshold of sufficiency level. 

According to Sher, the ways for increasing people's way of making better judgments or 

thinking clearly include resources, opportunities, and education. With their increase, an 

agent  “will  rather  quickly  reach  a  point  at  which  the  only  thing  stopping  him  from 

overcoming the remaining obstacles to effectiveness is his own ability to use what he 

already has." (Sher 2014, 164) It is unjust for an agent if he is “unable to succeed at a life 

	

15 

that requires a level of judgment or reasoning ability that surpasses one's upper limit; for 

here again, what makes such a life inaccessible is precisely the agent's own entrenched 

mental make-up." (Sher 2014, 169) 

However, the "highest effective level that is available" might be low and blur for 

the agent who suffer from epistemic injustice (but he still might not be able to aware of 

it). There will still be outside remaining obstacles pushed from the society. Moreover, 

think about the scenarios where the mental make-up is shaped by the discrimination, or 

suffers  from  being  dominated  by  epistemic  injustice,  can  we  say  the  person  is  still 

effective? I think the answer is no. We, the society, would feel ashamed and feel bad for 

him. Had he known it, he would feel so bad about himself but have nothing to do with 

it. The only thing left to him is just a lot of regret. Hence we can say this is not what he 

really wants. Think of a slave who just cannot imagine what a better life would be like 

because he lacks “epistemic access” to a better picture. Although he can bring about his 

plans and execute them well, we can hardly say it is just for him.  

 

4. Objections and Replies 

My  criticism  to  Sher’s  first-person  egalitarianism  is  far  from  complete  without 

considering several possible objections to my criticism. In this part of my paper, I give 

several possible objections on how a first-person egalitarian could raise objections to my 

criticism.  

	

16 

4.1. A Split World 

The first one is best illustrated from an example: imagine a society where there exists 

epistemic  injustice  but  there  is  “no  effect”  (no  practical  consequence)  of   “epistemic 

justice”. Everybody can realize their life goals and live effectively. For instance, there 

are two remote villages4 that never interact but they epistemically hate each other and 

have severe discriminations toward each others.) But citizens in these two villages still 

enjoy good lives and do not suffer from any factual discrimination. In this case, there is 

epistemic  justice  but  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  unjust  inequality  (according  to 

Sher’s  view).  Does  this  story  show  that  epistemic  injustice  is  insignificant  and 

inessential? 

I have three responses to this objection. First, it is hard for us to think about a 

scenario like this where people just ignore each other. In our society, there at least in 

fact exists epistemic injustice now. In this world where information changes rapidly and 

people interact with each other in a much more comprehensive and frequent way. So 

this  objection  is  not  really  practically  applicable  to  my  criticism.  Moreover,  this  story 

focuses  on  discrimination  between  these  two  villages.  To  use  Fricker’s  terminology 

again,  this  is  a  case  where  there  is  no  testimonial  injustice  but  there  might  still  be 

hermeneutical  injustice.  Why  do  they  hate  each  other?  Is  there  any  hierarchy,  or 

potential superiority or difference on intellectual abilities between these two villages? 

																																																								
	

4 This example is mainly developed from the story of Les and Morey in Sher (2014). 

17 

Citizens from the “inferior village” might have trouble in understanding some words. 

As  I  stated  before,  hermeneutical  injustice  also  has  significant  consequence  in 

distributive justice. Thus it cannot be ignored.  Last but not the least, even though we 

grant this story could happen and there is no significant consequence of hermeneutical 

injustice,  let  us  think  about  what  a  government  that  cares  about  distributive  justice 

should do in this case: should they keep separating these two villages so they cannot 

interact, or build a scenario where they would interact better if they actually interact? 

The  second  solution  is  better  than  the  first  one  for  intellectual  and  moral  reasons. 

Intellectually,  the  government  is  keeping  the  stupidity  of  citizens  from  the  “inferior” 

village.  Morally,  keeping  stupid  citizens  stupid  does  not  reflect  the  government’s 

respect to them. In his book, Sher claims that "there is no known way of making foolish 

people wise" (Sher 2014, 162) It might be a sad truth. But we can still ask some further 

questions: should the government keep foolish people stupid? What is the threshold for 

being  “wise”,  anyway?  Does  it  have  to  be  a  level  that  is  commensurate  with  a  math 

prodigy’s? Probably not. In my opinion, as long as the government could make foolish 

people comparably wiser than they in fact are, it should be what the state does. Keeping 

foolish people foolish is not the solution.  

4.2 Epistemic Justice and Distributive Justice 

The  second  objection  to  my  criticism  is  that:  epistemic  injustice  is  not  a  real  issue  in 

distributive justice. As long as a first-person egalitarian specifies which kind of social 

	

18 

goods there are in the distributive scenarios and what kind of “leverage” is best for an 

agent,  a  theory  about  distributive  justice  would  be  sufficiently  built.  Hence  we  don’t 

need to worry about the epistemic part. When first-person egalitarians draw the picture 

on  the  distribution  of  resources  and  opportunities,  they  are  already  considering  the 

epistemic injustice. It is an integral part of resource, or opportunity for agents. A certain 

level of education, or some other certain kind of social setting that work as resources or 

opportunities  that  could  promote  and  provide  each  agent’s  with  the  abilities  to  be  a 

better  thinker  and  decision  maker,  which  makes  him  understand  key  concepts  better 

and  alleviate  hermeneutical  injustice.  More  importantly,  an  ideal  educational  system 

that the state provides to each citizen should also eliminate discriminatory beliefs based 

on  race,  gender,  and  other  irrelevant  factors.  As  a  result,  there  is  no  testimonial 

injustice. Therefore, epistemic injustice does not threaten first-person egalitarianism.  

In response to this worry, I introduce a more nuanced taxonomy for the concept 

of  epistemic  injustice  from  David  Coady,  who  distinguishes  between  discriminatory 

epistemic 

injustice  and  distributive  epistemic 

injustice.  Testimonial 

injustice  and 

hermeneutical  injustice  could  be  categorized  into  the  former  whereas  the  unjust 

distribution of epistemic goods—like education or information—should be categorized 

into  the  latter.  (Coady  2010)  Sher’s  account  could  well  accommodate  the  needs  for 

distributive epistemic injustice but cannot really alleviate discriminatory epistemic injustice. 

It will be promising if enough amount of education could achieve this aim. But in fact, 

	

19 

as  we  may  see,  education  in  the  real  world  is  far  from  ideal.  Some  other  values  of 

education  (for  example,  autonomy,  diversity,  freedom  in  thinking,  etc.)  might  also 

trump  our  concerns  for  epistemic  justice.  It  is  hard  to  eliminate  discrimination  in 

people’s  ideology  merely  by  education.  Once  we  realize  there  is  something  more  in 

eliminating  discriminatory  epistemic  injustice  than  distributive  epistemic  injustice,  we  can 

call for a more direct attention on the factual discrimination in society, instead of having 

wishful  thinking  on  the  effects  of  education.  More  importantly,  how  does  the  state 

allocate the educational resources to citizens in different social levels? It is possible that 

when one chooses what kind of education would be the best5 for her, there is already 

some  underlying  epistemic  injustice  in  her  reasoning:  maybe  she  cannot  understand 

some concepts because of hermeneutical injustice; maybe she suffers from testimonial 

injustice caused by others. Thus she does not know what kind of education is sufficient, 

or best for her. Using Sher’s term, the agent does not clearly know what the appropriate 

“leverage” is. Should the state let her suffer? If education is a process that involves an 

agent’s  choice  and  her  conception  might  be  skewed  by  epistemic  injustice,  then 

alleviating or eliminating epistemic injustice might be better for the agent. 

4.3 Paternalism 

Another way for a first-person egalitarian to argue against my criticism might be saying 

that taking care of the epistemic side of one’s life would be too paternalistic. As a result, 

																																																								
	

5 Of course, we do not consider a very paternalistic state that just force one to go to some certain 
school without choice. 

20 

relational egalitarianism will also suffer from a similar problem with LE. What is worse, 

forcing a person to improve his judgments violates his autonomy in making judgments.  

I think this should not be a charge from the side of first-person egalitarianism, 

because  relational  egalitarians  will  in  fact  agree  with  first-person  egalitarians  on  this 

issue.  The  reason  is  Sher—a  first-person  egalitarian—clearly  suggests  that  we  should 

“criminalize  the  actions  against  the  value  the  society  promotes.”  (Sher  2014,  117)  To 

accommodate the concern of personal autonomy with relational egalitarianism, the state 

could  promote  equality  by  putting  epistemic  justice  into  its  social  framework  and 

primary social values and goals. It is not too much an addition from the picture that a 

first-person  egalitarian  might 

imagine.  Within 

this 

framework  of  relational 

egalitarianism, agents can still make judgments with constraints. More importantly, in a 

society equipped with epistemic justice, agent can still make different judgments about 

their  situations,  bring  up  their  own  different  life  plans,  and  execute  them  (or  in  a 

general  way,  cope  with  contingency).  The  additional  emphasis  relational  egalitarians 

have is the less amount of epistemic biases and limits. Agents might even have more 

autonomy.  Furthermore,  without  epistemic  injustice,  their  judgments  could  be  more 

truth-conducive  and  better  in  helping  other  people  directing  and  realizing  practical 

goals. A state without epistemic injustice will still allow people continuously act in a 

“stupid” way (for instance, mistakes done out of self-diluting, wrong choices, wishful 

thinking, etc.).  

	

21 

4.4 The Design of Social Institutions 

The  last  worry  I  consider  is  whether  reach  a  state  without  epistemic  injustice  is 

practical. Maybe a first-person egalitarian will say, it would be great if we can have a 

state  without  epistemic  injustice,  but  it  is  hard  and  unrealistic  to  develop  social 

institutions based on the considerations of epistemic justice. After all, the epistemic life 

of  each  citizen  might  be  difficult  to  control.  Since  the  ideal  picture  for  relational 

egalitarianism  with  epistemic  justice  is  impractical  and  unrealistic,  we  should  favor 

some other theory like Sher’s first-person egalitarianism, on which we might be easier 

to design our social institutions.  

Giving  a  detailed  picture  on  how  to  build  social  institutions  is  far  from  my 

expertise but here I will try show that it is not impossible to have social institutions built 

with the concerns of epistemic injustice. The idea is not complicated, but to put it into 

practice,  it’s  hard.  My  suggestions  will  be  along  the  lines  with  Anderson(2012)  and 

Fricker (2013). 

In Fricker (2007), she calls for a “collective social and political change” (Fricker 

2007, 8) for reaching an ideal state without epistemic injustice. More detailed depiction 

is given in Ficker (2013), where she emphasizes the ethos and virtue for social institutions 

and  also  explains  the  relation  between  epistemic  injustice  and  non-domination  in 

society.  The “ethos” of social institutions is defined as the “sense among the members 

of the institutional body that they stand for values of a certain kind, and take pride in 

	

22 

ensuring  their  work  lives  up  to  those  values.”    (Fricker  2013,  1326-1327)  With  the 

consideration of an organization’s ethos, “its good actions are done in significant part 

because of the ethos, then we see the other key condition of virtue fulfilled—that the 

good action is done for the right sorts of reason” (Fricker 2013, 1327) 

Fricker  also  uses  the  consideration  of  epistemic  justice  to  argue  that  non-

domination is a liberal ideal and could bring right outcome for right reasons if we build 

it  into  the  ethos  of  institutions.  She  says,  “the  institutional  bodies  to  which  citizens 

might  contest  need  to  nurture  institutional  virtues  of  epistemic  justice,  because  the 

domain of contestation is one in which citizens rightly expect justice to be done.” (Ficker 

2013, 1331)  

So what would be a real-world example of such institutional design? Anderson 

gives  a  detailed  example  on  how  to  think  against  group  segregation  from  the 

perspective of epistemic justice. She says, “When social groups are educated together on 

terms of equality, they share equally in educational resources and thus have access to 

the same (legitimate) markers of credibility.” (Anderson 2012, 171) An institution with 

group  integration  has  the  epistemic  virtue  because  it  improves  the  credibility  and 

supposedly will alleviate or even eliminate discrimination from testimonial injustice.  

 
5. Conclusion 
 
In  my  paper,  I  first  make  a  distinction  between  three  kinds  of  egalitarianism  in 

	

distributive  justice  based  on  the  perspectives  of  justification:  third-person  (Luck 

23 

Egalitarianism), second-person (Democratic Egalitarianism, or relational egalitarianism 

in general), and first-person egalitarianism (or Sher’s sufficientarian version). Second-

person  egalitarianism  is  considered  to  be  a  relational  account  whereas  the  other  two 

versions  are  considered  to  be  non-relational.  I  argue  that  from  the  consideration  of 

epistemic  justice,  relational  egalitarianism  is  better  than  its  non-relational  rivals.  The 

main  targeted  account  is  Sher’s  first-person  egalitarianism.  I  have  shown  that  his 

account puts too much epistemic burden on agents and does not address the worries 

from  epistemic  justice.  Perhaps  Sher’s  account  is  much  more  nuanced  than  I  have 

described and speculated here, but I hope my work could spark further discussions on 

epistemic injustice and its relation with different accounts of distributive justice in the 

 

future. 

 

	

24 

Bibliography  

 
Anderson, Elizabeth S. (1999). What is the point of equality? Ethics 109 (2):287-337. 
 
Anderson, Elizabeth (2008). How Should Egalitarians Cope with Market Risks? Theoretical Inquiries 
in Law, 9 (1):239-270.  
 
Anderson, Elizabeth (2010). The fundamental disagreement between luck egalitarians and relational 
egalitarians. In Colin M. Macleod (ed.), Justice and Equality . University of Calgary Press 1-23. 
 
Anderson, Elizabeth (2012). Epistemic Justice as a Virtue of Social Institutions. Social Epistemology 26 
(2):163-173. 
 
Arneson, Richard, "Egalitarianism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2013 
Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2013/entries/egalitarianism/>. 
 
Coady, David (2010). Two Concepts of Epistemic Injustice. Episteme 7 (2):101-113. 
 
Cohen, G. A.  (1989). On the Currency of Egalitarian Justice. Ethics, Vol. 99, No. 4, (Jul., 1989), pp. 
906-944  
 
Dworkin, Ronald (2002), Sovereign Virtue: The Theory and Practice of Equality, Harvard University 
Press 
 
Dworkin, Ronald (1981). What is equality? Part 2: Equality of resources. Philosophy and Public Affairs 
10 (4):283 - 345. 
 
Frankfurt, Harry (1987). Equality as a moral ideal. Ethics, 98 (1):21-43. 
 
Fricker, Miranda (2007). Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing. Oxford University Press. 
 
Fricker, Miranda (2013). Epistemic justice as a condition of political freedom? Synthese, 190 (7):1317-
1332. 
 
Parfit, Derek (1997). Equality and priority. Ratio 10 (3):202–221. 
 
Sher, George (2014). Equality for Inegalitarians. Cambridge University Press. 
 
Williams, Bernard (2002). Truth and Truthfulness: An Essay in Genealogy. Princeton, New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press. 
 

	

25 


