Open-mindedness	as	a	Practical	Virtue		

Jeremy	Yuanming	Shi	
Final	Paper	for	PHIL	531	Moral	Psychology		
12/10/15	
4320	words	
	
Open-mindedness	is	usually	considered	to	be	a	virtue.	But	why	is	open-mindedness	an	
intellectual	virtue,	and	why	is	it	valuable	in	the	practical	domain?	We	might	say	open-
mindedness	is	valuable	in	theoretical	reasoning	because	it	is	truth-conducive.	However,	in	
the	realm	of	practical	reasoning	where	the	truths	are	murky,	not	so	obvious,	or	maybe	do	
not	exist	at	all,	is	open-mindedness	still	a	virtue	and	valuable?	Depending	on	one’s	
metaethical	commitment	on	moral	truth,	there	are	two	kinds	of	answer:	one	approach	
would	be	to	keep	the	position	of	moral	realism	and	grant	that	there	are	moral	truths.	It	
follows	that	open-mindedness	can	help	us	reach	the	truth.	In	other	words,	open-
mindedness	is	still—similar	with	its	role	in	the	theoretical	domain—truth-conducive;	
another	approach	would	be	to	grant	that	even	if	moral	realism	is	false	and	normative	
judgments	are	contingent	(that	is	to	say,	moral	truth	relies	on	whatever	factors	or	notions	
different	versions	of	moral	anti-realism	take),	open-mindedness	is	still	an	(intellectual)	
virtue.			
In	her	paper	Open-mindedness	and	Normative	Contingency,	Valerie	Tiberius	takes	the	
second	approach	and	argues	that	in	the	context	of	moral	anti-realism	(or	moral	
skepticism),	open-mindedness	is	still	a	virtue.	Tiberius	argues	that	although	open-
mindedness	seems	not	to	be	truth-conducive	under	these	metaethical	positions/theories,	it	
will	help	us	understand	factual	claims	by	collecting	more	evidence,	which	could	still	further	
support	bringing	out	our	future	plans	and	fulfill	our	long-term	goals	by	making	our	
1	
	

judgment	“resilient”.	That	is	also	why	open-mindedness	is	valuable	in	the	practical	domain.	
To	achieve	her	goals,	Tiberius	first	adopts	the	framework	of	Thomas	Scanlon’s	
contractualism,	which	suggests	that	our	practical	interests	ground	the	correctness	of	
normative	judgments.	Then	she	introduces	the	concept	of	resilience	in	practical	reasoning	
and	shows	how	the	requirement	of	resilience	could	vindicate	open-mindedness	as	a	
practical	virtue.	According	to	Tiberius,	since	one	important	aspect	of	practical	rationality	in	
bringing	about	our	actions	is	to	have	“resilience”	in	our	beliefs	and	open-mindedness	could	
help	us	increase	resilience	for	normative	judgments	and	actions,	open-mindedness	is	
vindicated.		
Another	approach	on	why	open-mindedness	is	a	practical	virtue	is	from	Nomy	
Arpaly	and	Timothy	Schroeder.	Their	account	does	not	assume	a	particular	background	of	
any	specific	metaethical	theory.	To	explain	why	open-mindedness	is	practically	virtuous	
and	valuable,	they	interpret	the	issue	in	a	desire-based	account.	According	to	Arpaly	and	
Schroeder,	open-mindedness	in	practical	reasoning	is	different	from	theoretical	open-
mindedness	in	epistemology.	It	does	not	have	to	be	evidence-conducive	or	truth-conducive.	
On	the	contrary,	open-mindedness	is	a	practical	virtue	because	it	shows	pro	tanto	good	will	
(or	reverse	moral	indifference),	correctly	conceived.	
Here	is	the	structure	of	my	paper.	First,	I	give	Tiberius’s	definition	of	open-
mindedness	and	explain	some	crucial	concepts	within	it.	I	also	provide	several	challenges	
to	Tiberius’s	account	of	open-mindedness.	Then	I	review	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	account	
on	open-mindedness	from	Arpaly	(2011)	and	Arpaly	and	Schroeder	(2014).	In	the	third	
2	
	

1.1	Definition	

1.	Tiberius’s	Account	

part	of	my	paper,	I	compare	these	two	accounts	and	show	where	the	tensions	are.		In	the	
end	I	draw	my	conclusion	and	raise	questions	for	future	studies.	
	
Tiberius	starts	her	discussion	on	open-mindedness	by	tracing	back	to	John	Stuart	Mill.	In	
the	book	 On	 Liberty,	Mill	says	that	open-mindedness	is	a	unified	virtue	across	both	
theoretical	and	practical	domains.	In	the	theoretical	domain,	it	helps	the	agent	to	“profit	by	
as	much	of	it	as	was	just,	and	expound	to	himself…the	fallacy	of	what	was	fallacious.”	(Mill	
1859/1978,	19)	In	the	practical	domain	where	agents	make	moral	judgments,	it	helps	to	
derive	“a	real	understanding	of	moral	and	human	subjects,	that	if	opponent’s	of	all	
important	truths	do	not	exist,	it	is	indispensable	to	imagine	them,	and	supply	them	with	the	
strongest	arguments	which	the	most	skillful	devil’s	advocate	can	conjure	up.”	(Mill	
1859/1978,	36)		
Tiberius	shows	some	doubts	on	Mill’s	appraisal	of	open-mindedness	in	the	practical	
domain:	it	seems	that	we	clearly	don’t	want	to	“consider	the	strongest	arguments	we	can	
think	of	for	moral	nihilism	or	the	permissibility	of	genocide”	(Tiberius	2012,	184)	To	
develop	her	own	account	of	open-mindedness,	Tiberius	first	uses	the	definition	from	
Wayne	Riggs	(2010).	Riggs	considers	open-mindedness	as	a	theoretical	virtue	in	
epistemology.	For	an	agent	to	be	open-minded	is	“to	be	aware	of	one’s	fallibility	as	a	
believer,	and	to	be	willing	to	acknowledge	the	possibility	that	any	time	one	believes	
something,	it	is	possible	that	one	is	wrong.”	(Adler	2004,	128)	As	agents,	we	also	have	the	
3	
	

“self-knowledge	prone	to	error"	and	“prepared	to	take	seriously	the	views	of	others,	
especially	when	those	views	are	in	conflict	with	one’s	own.”	(Riggs	2010,	177)	
To	clarify	the	definition,	we	need	to	look	at	the	basic	subject	and	features	of	open-
mindedness.	Is	being	open-minded	a	psychological	character	or	disposition	that	does	not	
have	to	be	manifested,	or	is	it	a	unique	evaluative	attitude	one	holds	toward	some	
proposition?		Mill	does	not	clearly	address	this	in	his	work,	but	Riggs	says	open-
mindedness	is	about	some	specific	kind	of	propositions.	Mill	just	says	to	keep	“his	mind	
open	to	criticism	of	his	opinions	and	conduct”.	(Mill	1859/1978,	19)	It	seems	that	we	could	
consider	it	as	a	virtue,	or	a	disposition.	We	could	also	interpret	Mill’s	definition	on	open-
mindedness	to	be	about	propositions	(because	Mill	says	“opinions”).	Similarly,	it	seems	
that	Riggs	and	Tiberius	also	consider	open-mindedness	to	be	about	some	proposition	(or	
some	set	of	proposition)	to	which	we	have	low	confidence.	Tiberius	says,	"the	epistemically	
virtuous	person	will	direct	her	open-mindedness	to	the	beliefs	about	which	she	is	most	
likely	to	be	in	error."	(Tiberius	2012,	184)	
So	in	this	way,	open-mindedness	is	a	virtue,	and	to	manifest	this	virtue,	an	agent	has	
to	be	open-minded	about	some	proposition(s).	Although	in	daily	conversation,	we	say	one	
is	“open-minded	to	others”,	Mill,	Riggs	and	Tiberius’s	interpretation	mainly	focuses	on	
propositions.	If	one	has	the	virtue	of	open-mindedness,	then	she	is	open-minded	about	p,	
and	she	is	more	willing	to	accept	more	evidence	about	p	and	opinions	about	p	from	others.	
This	proposition	 p	also	has	to	some	proposition	where	he	has	low	confidence	on.	
Depending	on	whether	 p	is	a	factual	claim	or	normative	claim,	it	manifests	open-
mindedness	as	a	virtue	in	theoretical	or	normative	realm.		
	
4	
	

1.2	Vindication	of	Open-mindedness	as	a	Practical	Virtue	

Tiberius	has	two	main	steps	to	vindicate	open-mindedness	as	a	virtue	against	a	
background	of	normative	contingency.	The	first	step	is	to	adopt	Scanlon’s	contractualism	as	
the	proper	theory	for	explaining	open-mindedness	as	a	virtue.	The	second	step	is	to	
introduce	the	notion	of	resilience	and	show	the	role	of	open-mindedness	within	resilience	
and	actions.	Tiberius	argues	that	even	if	there	is	no	moral	truth	“out	there”,	resilience	built	
and	understood	in	the	contractualist	framework	can	still	give	us	reasons	to	identify	open-
mindedness	as	a	virtue.		
First,	Tiberius	reviews	different	versions	moral	anti-realism	including	expressivism,	
emotionism,	and	subjective	constructivism.	These	theories	all	result	in	normative	
contingency.	Now	the	question	is	whether	open-mindedness	is	compatible	with	normative	
contingency	under	these	frameworks.	According	to	Tiberius,	none	of	them	succeed	in	
explaining	why	open-mindedness	is	a	virtue	or	why	open-mindedness	is	truth-conducive.	
So	Tiberius	turns	into	another	form	of	constructivism:	Scanlon’s	contractualism.	
Contractualism	suggests	that	“the	truth	of	moral	claims	about	what	we	owe	to	each	other	
consists	in	their	resulting	from	a	discursive	process	that	seeks	to	reach	agreement	on	the	
basis	of	considerations	no	one	could	reasonably	reject.”	(Scanlon	1998)	It	“builds	in	the	
value	of	other	people’s	opinions	from	the	outset.”	(Tiberius	2012,	188)	After	introducing	
Scanlon’s	contractualism,	Tiberius	considers	the	psychological	process	when	we	make	
practical	decisions.	To	make	a	good	decision,	we	need	a	notion	of	“resilience”	to	“refer	to	
the	desirable	property	that	we	hope	our	normative	judgment	have”	(Tiberius	2012,	188)	
Since	moral	truths	are	constructed	through	all	citizens	in	a	society	and	we	need	to	justify	
5	
	

our	decisions	in	the	practical	realm,	practical	judgments	should	be	scrutinized	and	
constructed	against	a	social	background.	That	is	why	resilience	is	needed.	It	requires	more	
than	mere	stability	under	others’	criticism	and	experience.	According	to	Tiberius,	a	
judgment	is	resilient	if	it	is	“stable	in	the	light	of	 rational	criticism	and	 relevant	new	
experiences.”	(Tiberius	190,	original	emphasis)1		
The	second	step	is	to	use	show	why	resilience	is	important	in	our	practical	decision	
making	and	vindicate	open-mindedness	as	a	virtue.	Tiberius	gives	us	a	psychological	
picture	of	decision	making	and	acting	from	these	decisions.	Several	main	features	of	
practical	decision	making	are	drawn	by	Tiberius	as	follows:	
(1)	require	sacrificing	other	things	we	want	for	the	sake	of	what	we	take	to	be	more	
important;		
(2)	require	long-term	action	to	achieve	the	desired	end;	
(3)	have	effects	on	other	people	whose	opinions	we	care	about;	
(4)	invite	criticism	from	people	who	care	about	us	or	our	actions;		
(5)	have	long-term	consequences	that	are	influenced	by	factors	out	of	our	control”	
(Tiberius	2012,	192)	
Maybe	these	considerations	are	far	from	the	whole	stories	of	making	moral	judgments	and	
practical	decisions.	However,	according	to	Tiberius,	moral	and	prudential	judgments	from	
these	considerations	are	still	practical	“even	if	they	do	not	have	immediate	implications	for	
action.”	(Tiberius	2012,	193)	An	agent	considers	long-term	goals	have	long-term	planning	
for	practical	judgments.	If	he	changes	his	mind	frequently,	it	will	make	“the	initial	sacrifices	
more	likely	to	be	in	vain”.	(Tiberius	2012,	190)	On	the	contrary,	if	his	judgments	are	
resilient	(i.e.	stable	for	good	reasons),	then	he	can	“rest	assured	in	the	way	necessary	for	
long-term	planning	and	practical	action.”	(Tiberius	2012,	193)		That	is	why	resilience	is	
																																																								
1	I	will	consider	potential	problems	to	this	notion	in	1.3.	
6	
	

1.3	Puzzles	

valuable	in	the	practical	domain:	it	helps	us	by	conforming	to	social	norms	(increase	
confidence,	avoid	regret,	defend	challenges,	avoid	criticism,	etc.)	and	in	general	make	
better	judgments	and	achieve	long-term	goals	in	practical	domain.	
To	sum	up,	given	Scanlon’s	Contractualism,	open-mindedness	has	its	instrumental	
value	to	resilience	and	gives	us	a	virtuous	(i.e.	truth-conducive)	process	in	the	practical	
domain.	Therefore,	open-mindedness	as	a	virtue	is	vindicated.		
However,	several	further	questions	could	be	asked	on	Tiberius’s	definition	of	open-
mindedness.	The	first	is	on	the	concept	of	resilience.	Recall	that	Tiberius’s	definition	of	
resilience	is	to	be	stable	in	light	of	rational	criticism	and	relevant	new	experiences.	Isn’t	it	
the	case	that	we’ve	already	built	normative	terms	(rational,	relevant)	into	the	definition	of	
resilience?	Since	we	are	using	resilience	against	a	background	of	contractualism,	the	norms	
need	to	be	socially	built	rather	than	presumed.	Tiberius	realizes	this	potential	problem.	She	
argues	that	there	does	not	have	to	be	norms	in	the	framework.	She	says,	“What	I	have	
assumed	is	that	people	take	judgments	to	be	better	or	worse,	more	or	less	resilient,	and	
that	people	take	resilience	to	be	desirable.”	(Tiberius	2012,	190)	She	draws	more	supports	
from	Alan	Gibbard.	Her	reasoning	is	from	the	stand	of	Gibbard.	"Gibbard	says	that	to	claim	
something	with	authority,	a	person	needs	to	think	that	her	judgment	process	has	adhered	
to	norms	that	legitimately	constrain	all	judgments…a	person	needs	to	think	that	the	claim	
she	puts	forward	is	the	best	judgment	she	can	make	and	this	is	just	to	say	that	she	needs	to	
think	that	her	judgment	is	stable	for	the	right	reasons."(Tiberius	2012,	192)	However,	as	
we	may	know,	Gibbard’s	expressivism	is	different	from	Scanlon’s	contractualism	that	
7	
	

Tiberius	adopts.	If	expressivism	does	not	warrant	socially	constructed	norm,	how	could	
Tiberius’s	story	still	be	plausible?	Even	if	we	grant	Gibbard	expressivism	is	compatible	with	
contractualism	or	works	in	a	similar	way,	we	may	still	ask:	what	if	there	are	different	
norms	from	different	parties?	Is	there	any	space	of	conciliation	here?		
Tiberius’s	view	implies	that	one’s	norm	could	be	changed	from	social	interaction	
with	a	selection	of	norms	she	wants	to	endorse.	However,	if	her	firmly-held	norm	keeps	her	
from	interacting	with	others	(because	the	norms	others	already	hold	are	vastly	different	
from	her.	In	other	words,	she	selects	only	a	small	range	of	people	to	show	her	open-
mindedness	and	be	resilient	to	them.	For	example,	think	of	an	“open-minded”	person	who’s	
a	hard-core	Kantian	under	Tiberius’s	account.	She	would	still	love	to	listen	to	what	she	
takes	to	be	the	 rational	and	 relevant	information	from	other	deontologists.	Maybe	she	
usually	tries	to	argue	with	them	in	order	to	derive	the	best	version	of	deontology	and	apply	
it	into	discussing	issues	like	animal	welfare.	She	may	also	use	it	get	more	resilient	so	as	to	
bring	about	her	long-term	plans	better.	However,	since	she	only	considers	“rational”	and	
“relevant”	evidence	from	others,	she	probably	won't	listen	to	people	who	present	an	
argument	from	Peter	Singer.	In	other	words,	under	Tiberius’s	framework,	this	person	is	
open-minded	because	she	tries	to	be	resilient	and	constructs	the	best	theory	from	other	
members	in	society.	However,	rational	requirements	of	resilience	keep	her	from	
conciliating	with	others	who	hold	a	vastly	different	normative	theory	(in	this	case,	Singer’s	
utilitarianism).	Her	open-mindedness	is	hardly	to	be	considered	virtuous	because	at	the	
same	time	her	open-mindedness	comes	with	closed-mindedness—which	is	a	vice—on	the	
same	issue.	Thus	if	this	kind	of	story	is	possible,	open-mindedness	according	to	Tiberius	is	
sometimes	not	a	virtue.	It	might	rather	further	polarize	the	agent’s	normative	conviction.	
8	
	

The	second	worry	I	have	against	Tiberius	is	about	the	underlying	metaethical	
commitments.	Her	discussion	is	largely	in	the	background	of	moral	anti-realism.	Now	if	
moral	realism	were	true,	would	open-mindedness	still	work	in	the	same	truth-conducive	
way	as	it	works	in	theoretical	domain?	In	other	words,	under	a	framework	of	moral	
realism,	do	we	learn	the	moral	truthsin	the	same	way	with	other	factual	truths?	There	
might	be	some	special	grounding	relations	between	moral	truths	and	factual	truths,	which	
makes	us	to	learn	them	differently.	Moreover,	there	are	different	versions	of	moral	realism	
including	naturalistic,	non-naturalistic,	etc.	How	do	we	learn	these	factual	truths	and	do	we	
need	to	know	how	these	moral	truths	are	derived	from	them2	So	Tiberius	still	needs	to	
build	a	connection	between	factual	truth	and	moral	truth	and	explains	how	we	know	them.	
Without	further	interpretation,	Tiberius’s	expected	picture	is	far	from	complete.	
Moreover,	a	more	fundamental	question	is:	does	truth-conduciveness	really	matter	
in	our	discussions	on	open-mindedness	at	all?	Moreover,	is	Mill	even	correct	in	stating	that	
open-mindedness	is	truth-conducive?	If	it	is	not	truth-conducive	or	even	falsity-conducive	
(as	the	previous	example	about	the	deontologist	might	show),	how	should	we	understand	
open-mindedness	as	a	virtue,	anyway?	Are	there	any	considerations	other	than	truth-
conduciveness	in	our	conception	of	open-mindedness?	If	there	is	any,	does	the	
consideration	undermine	our	discussion,	or	will	give	us	more	lessons	in	the	discussion	of	
open-mindedness	in	the	practical	domain?	According	to	constructivism,	“the	correctness	of	
normative	judgments	to	depend	on	a	process	of	construction	in	which	we	take	a	practical	
interest”	(Tiberius	2012,	203)	but	open-mindedness	still	does	not	fit	tightly	with	all	
																																																								
2	Maybe	we	will	also	have	another	worry	here:	what	if	in	a	more	fundamental	level,	there	are	
metaethical	disagreements	with	regard	to	which	one	is	the	best	theory?	Shall	we	still	be	open-
minded	on	this	issue?	
9	
	

	

2.	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	Account	

pracitcal	interests.		Could	it	be	the	case	that	there	is	a	more	underlying	consideration	in	our	
action?	Maybe	we	are	not	aware	of	the	resilience	in	our	goal.	It	is	not	even	a	main	
consideration,	or	there	will	be	problematic	cases	where	other	other	practical	concern	
becomes	the	main	concern	for	our	action.	An	appropriate	example	here	would	be	last-ditch	
akrasia.	Another	example	would	be	from	an	imaginative	Kantian	(but	not	a	“deontological	
saint”),	in	some	cases,	for	example,	when	a	steroid	attacks	the	earth	or	just	a	simple	trolley	
case,	he	will	consider	do	some	utilitarian	calculation	and	make	decision	out	of	it.	If	these	
cases	happen	to	him	a	lot,	what	could	we	say	about	these	him	and	his	long-term	goal?	The	
framework	of	Tiberius	falls	short	of	explanation	again.3		
Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	account	of	open-mindedness	is	framed	in	a	larger	discussion	on	
virtue.	It	is	presented	within	a	much	simple,	straightforward,	and	unified	picture	of	virtue	
by	developing	a	desire-based	account.	Explaining	“virtue”	as	an	umbrella	account,	open-
mindedness	is	easier	to	be	understood.		
To	explain	why	open-mindedness	is	a	virtue	in	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	framework,	
we	should	first	look	at	their	definition	of	desire.	They	take	desire	to	be	a	natural	kind:	
“intrinsic	desires	are	the	things,	whatever	they	turn	out	to	be	in	themselves,	found	in	
people	and	other	animals,	causing	the	actions,	feelings,	and	cognitions	that	we	associate	
with	terms	such	as	“desire”	and	“want.””	(Arpaly	&	Schroeder,	2014,	144)	In	terms	of	
virtue,	they	claim	“paradigmatic	virtue	is	just	the	possession	of	a	great	deal	of	good	will.”	
																																																								
3	We	might	give	a	better	interpretation	for	these	cases	from	a	perspective	of	intrinsic	desire	by	the	
theory	I	will	introduce	in	the	next	section.	
10	
	

(Arpaly	&	Schroeder,	2014,	291)	To	be	more	specific,	open-mindedness	is	a	virtue	because	
it	manifests	good	will.	Different	from	the	Kantian	sense,	“good	will”	is	explained	from	the	
perspective	of	desire.	A	good	will	is	“an	intrinsic	desire	for	the	right	or	good	(its	referential	
content)	grasped	through	the	concepts	privileged	by	the	correct	normative	theory	of	the	
right	or	good	(its	sense).”	(Arpaly	&	Schroeder,	2014,	290)	An	intrinsic	desire	“makes	a	
person	good-hearted,	or	possessed	of	complete	good	will.”(ibid.)		Good	will	is	the	most	
important	part	of	virtue.	It	could	be	manifested	in	the	cases	where	the	agent	has	low	
confidence	because	she	is	not	sure	about	how	to	evaluate	evidence	correctly,	or	the	agent	
suspends	her	belief	because	of	a	scarce	amount	of	evidence.	Arpaly	and	Schroeder	state	an	
open-minded	person	“will	very	rarely,	for	example,	form	a	strong	opinion	about	a	
stranger’s	character	after	one	or	two	conversations,	even	if	the	stranger	took	“her”	parking	
spot	or,	conversely,	offered	her	zucchini	from	his	garden.	She	will	often	suspend	judgment	
on	new	social	trends,	feeling	she	does	not	understand	them	well	enough.”	(Arpaly	and	
Schroeder,	2014,	242)		It	is	directly	in	contrast	with	the	vice	of	close-mindedness,	where	
one’s	belief	is	“resistant	to	the	onslaught	of	counter-evidence,	in	a	manner	manifesting	
either	a	lack	of	good	will	or	the	presence	of	ill	will.”	(Arpaly	and	Schroeder,	2014,	240)		
	
In	this	part	of	my	paper,	I	consider	some	differences	between	Arpaly	and	
Schroeder’s	account	and	Tiberius’s	account	on	open-mindedness.	In	general,	Arpaly	and	
Schroeder’s	account	is	preferable	because	of	its	simplicity	and	fruitfulness	in	explanation.	
But	some	caveats	could	still	be	addressed	for	both	accounts.	
	
11	
	

3.	Comparisons	and	Evaluation	

The	first	is	about	the	underlying	metaethical	theory.	In	order	to	reconcile	virtuous	
open-mindedness	with	normative	contingency,	Tiberius	inspects	different	theories	of	
moral	anti-realism	and	chooses	Scanlon’s	construtalism	as	the	most	appropriate	version	to	
achieve	her	goals.	On	the	contrary,	Arpaly	and	Schroeder	do	not	place	any	metaethical	
commitments	in	their	theoretical	background.	They	explain	open-mindedness	purely	from	
the	perspectives	of	desire	and	practical	virtue.	Without	the	commitment,	Arpaly	and	
Schroeder’s	interpretation	is	simpler	than	Tiberius’s.4	
The	second	aspect	I	consider	is	on	the	“subject”,	or	the	“aboutness”	of	open-
mindedness.	In	other	words,	the	question	is:	given	one	person	has	the	virtue	of	open-
mindedness,	what	is	she	open-minded	to?	As	I	analyzed	in	part	1,	according	to	Mill,	Riggs,	
and	Tiberius,	she	has	to	be	open-minded	about	some	proposition	p	and	p	is	judged	by	the	
agent	likely	to	be	in	error.5		This	account	of	open-mindedness	does	not	focus	too	much	on	
the	cases	where	one	is	open-minded	towards	evidence	or	people.	According	to	Arpaly	and	
Schroeder,	on	the	contrary,	one	could	be	open-minded	about	some	moral	considerations.	
Open-mindedness,	as	a	virtue,	could	be	manifested	as	long	as	we	show	good	will,	it	does	not	
have	to	be	the	case	that	we	are	only	open-minded	about	propositions.	This	more	intuitive	
account	fits	better	with	our	daily	use	and	gives	us	more	fruitfulness	in	theorization.	
However,	relying	on	our	daily	use,	it	is	possible	there	does	seem	to	be	a	limit	on	what	we	
could	be	open-minded	about:	persons,	propositions,	and	sometimes	evidence.	Maybe	there	
																																																								
4	Here	I	consider	simplicity	to	be	an	advantage	of	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	account	on	open-
mindedness.	I	will	come	back	to	the	discussion	on	this	discussion	and	raise	my	further	worries	
about	this	theoretical	advantage	in	the	end	of	my	paper.		
5	Maybe	the	likelihood	to	be	in	error	is	not	a	main	concern	for	Riggs,	but	Tiberius	clearly	rephrases	
Riggs’s	discussion	on	open-mindedness	in	epistemology.	Tiberius	says,	“So,	the	epistemically	
virtuous	person	will	direct	her	open-mindedness	to	the	beliefs	about	which	she	is	most	likely	to	be	
in	error”	(Tiberius	2012,	185).	
12	
	

still	remain	some	further	questions:	what	else	could	we	be	open-mindedness	about?	How	
large	should	the	scope	of	open-mindedness	be?	
The	third	difference	is	on	whether	open-mindedness	always	involves	interactions	
with	other	people.	Tiberius	seems	to	give	an	affirmative	answer	because	of	the	
contractualism	she	adopts.	On	the	contrary,	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	account	does	not	have	
such	a	requirement.	An	example	they	give	is	that	“like	the	person	who	is	often	unsure	of	
her	beliefs	when	her	bank	account	is	at	stake,	the	open-minded	person	will	often	be	
somewhat	unsure	of	her	beliefs	when	something	moral	is	at	stake.”	(Arpaly	and	Schroeder	
2012,	242)	This	seems	to	be	a	case	of	open-mindedness	but	the	agent	does	not	interact	
with	others.	It	all	depends	on	how	the	agent	gets	to	know	there	is	something	moral	at	stake.	
It	could	come	from	evidence,	6	and	it	could	be	from	others’	testimony	as	well.	
The	fourth	difference,	perhaps	the	most	important	one,	is	the	aim	of	open-
mindedness.	Why	should	an	agent	be	open-minded?	What	is	it	valuable	for?	According	to	
Tiberius,	the	final	aim	of	open-mindedness	is	moral	truth	or	to	be	practically	helpful.	Open-
mindedness,	at	its	core,	is	truth-conducive	because	the	more	amount	evidence	it	can	
collect.	As	long	as	one	has	high	confidence	towards	based	on	the	evidence	(for	example,	the	
agent	knows	that	her	belief	well	conforms	to	social	norm	and	it	is	resilient),	it	is	good	
enough	for	her.	Social	norms	set	the	threshold	of	her	open-mindedness.		
However,	according	to	Arpaly	and	Schroeder,	if	an	agent	has	the	virtue	of	open-
mindedness,	she	will	keep	absorbing	evidence	and	evaluating	the	evidence	more	carefully,	
																																																								
6	We	can	think	of	someone	who	cares	about	the	environment,	animal	welfare,	engineering	design,	
etc.,	and	she	takes	these	considerations	and	relevant	evidence	to	be	“moral	stakes”	even	without	
interacting	with	others.	
	

13	

as	long	as	it	does	not	manifest	other	problems	like	the	anxious	nature.	7	(footnote:	example	
that	one	keeps	checking).	This	process	does	not	depend	on	whether	her	confidence	is	high	
or	not.	It	could	be	the	case	that	the	agent	has	already	acknowledged	that	the	belief	is	in	
conformity	with	the	social	norm	and	still	question	about	the	evidence	and	try	to	absorb	
more.	It	is	not	aimed	at	truth,	or	the	judgment	could	deviate	from	truth	due	to	suspended	
judgment	or	update	beliefs	more	carefully	with	more	care	and	deliberation.	Moreover,	a	
case	where	someone	believes	“I	have	evidence	for	 p	but	I	don’t	believe	 p”	could	also	
manifest	the	virtue	of	open-mindedness.	But	the	same	story	will	not	be	well	explained	by	
Tiberius’s	account.		
We	could	even	grant	more	licenses	for	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	account	by	including	
the	cases	where	open-mindedness	brings	us	a	new	belief,	which	is	not	explained	by	
Tiberius	either.	Consider	an	example	Arpaly	and	Schroeder	use	in	the	book:	in	the	middle	
of	a	funeral,	an	open-minded	atheist	philosopher	does	not	refute	her	host’s	belief	in	God.	
Arpaly	and	Schroeder	says,	“the	morally	concerned	person	qua	morally	concerned	person	
need	care	about	the	truth	only	when	the	truth	is	morally	salient,	when	there	are	moral	
stakes.”	(Arpaly	and	Schroeder,	2014,	244)	It	is	hardly	the	case	that	the	philosopher	
abandons	his	atheistic	belief.	It	seems	that	she	just	comes	to	believe	that	“it	is	best	not	to	
express	my	atheist	belief	in	this	funeral”.	It	seems	that	her	open-mindedness	causes	her	to	
form	a	new	belief	about	what	is	the	best	to	do	in	that	moment	instead	of	converting	her	
long-standing	atheist	conviction	to	theism.		
																																																								
7	The	example	Arpaly	and	Schroeder	give	is	one	who	has	“irrational	hesitation	in	making	negative	
moral	judgments”,	which	express	her	anxious	nature.	(See	Arpaly	and	Schroeder,	2014,	245)	
	

4.	Conclusion	and	Further	Questions		

	

14	

By	now	I	have	shown	two	different	accounts	of	open-mindedness:	one	is	from	Tiberius,	and	
the	other	is	from	Arpaly	and	Schroeder.	Both	accounts	explain	why	open-mindedness	is	a	
virtue	in	the	practical	domain.	Comparing	these	two	accounts,	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	
account	has	more	explanatory	power.	The	main	difference	between	these	two	accounts	is	
Tiberius’s	is	more	practically	orientated8	whereas	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	is	more	virtue-
based.		Although	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	account	is	judged	to	be	the	better	one,	several	
remaining	concerns	might	still	be	worth	mentioning	here:	is	there	anything	distinctive	
about	the	virtue	of	open-mindedness	that	makes	it	different	from	other	cognitive	virtues	
like	modesty,	humility,	or	thoughtfulness?	Moreover,	being	neutral	to	metaethical	theory	
makes	Arpaly	and	Schroder’s	theory	more	simplistic.	However,	some	metaethical	
challenges	that	mentioned	by	Tiberius	are	worth	considering:	a	skeptic	about	moral	
knowledge	might	completely	reject	the	notions	of	moral	truth	and	“good	will”,	what	would	
be	a	convincing	theory	on	open-mindedness	for	him?	To	be	more	general,	which	
metaethical	theory	might	not	be	consistent	with	Arpaly	and	Schroeder’s	framework?	After	
all,	I	think	the	Tiberius’s	account	of	open-mindedness	could	enlarge	the	scope	of	open-
mindedness	and	enrich	some	further	debates,	especially	against	a	metaethical	background	
of	moral-antirealism.	One	more	fundamental	question	is:	should	a	theory	of	moral	
psychology	really	be	neutral	to	different	meta-ethical	theories?		Tiberius’s	work	may	have	
shown	that	challenges	from	moral	anti-realism	might	spark	further	reflections	and	
discussions	on	some	concepts	(e.g.	open-mindedness)	in	moral	psychology.		
	
	
																																																								
8	Or	we	can	use	her	terminology	to	say	it	is	more	“resilience-seeking”.	
	

15	

Bibliography	

Adler,	Jonathan.	2004.	“Reconciling	Open-Mindedness	and	Belief.”	Theory	and	Research	in	
Education	2	(2):	127–42.		
	Arpaly,	Nomy.	2011.	“Open-Mindedness	as	a	Moral	Virtue.”	American	Philosophical	
Quarterly	48	(1):	75.	
	Arpaly,	Nomy,	and	Timothy	Schroeder.	2014.	In	Praise	of	Desire.	Oxford	University	Press	
	Mill,	John	Stuart.	1859/1978.	On	Liberty.	Hackett	Publishing	Company.	
	Riggs,	Wayne.	2010.	Open-mindedness,	Metaphilosophy	41	(1-2):	172–88.		
	Scanlon,	Thomas.	1998.	What	We	Owe	to	Each	Other.	Harvard	University	Press.	
	Tiberius,	Valerie.	2012.	Open-Mindedness	And	Normative	Contingency.	Oxford	Studies	in	
Metaethics	7:	182.	

	

	

16	


